ConclusionHigher mCRP levels were associated with premature CAD, independent of hsCRP levels and traditional risk factors. 4DiscussionThis study demonstrated that mCRP levels were higher in patients with CAD than in controls without CAD. Higher mCRP levels were associated with premature CAD, with an adjusted odds ratio of 1.18 (95% CI 1.06-1.33) per each µg/L increase in the levels of mCRP. This association was independent of traditional risk factors and hsCRP levels. Furthermore, in the study participants who presumably had no residual inflammatory risk (that is, hsCRP levels below 2.0 mg/L), the levels of mCRP were still higher in patients with CAD than without CAD.To date, mCRP levels have been studied in humans with regard to a number of pathologies, including atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (20, 24), osteoarthritis (25), acute inflammation (26), chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (27), autoimmune (28–30) and skin disorders (21), periodontitis (31), hepatitis B cirrhosis (32) and COVID-19 (33, 34). To our knowledge, few studies have reported the measurement of mCRP levels in atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. Wang et al. demonstrated that mCRP levels were elevated in patients with acute myocardial infarction, whereas in patients with angina pectoris and healthy volunteers mCRP levels were below the detection limit. It is noteworthy that among patients with myocardial infarction, mCRP levels were higher in those with a poor outcome (24). Furthermore, a study by Wu et al. demonstrated that among patients with antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody-associated vasculitis, mCRP levels were higher in patients with acute myocardial infarction than in those without it (30). In a recent study, we measured mCRP levels in individuals with asymptomatic carotid atherosclerosis and an initially moderate cardiovascular risk, performing follow-up for seven years. Higher mCRP levels were independently associated with an increase in the number and height of carotid atherosclerotic plaques by the end of the follow-up period. Noteworthy, this association was observed in individuals with normal hsCRP levels (20).The mCRP to hsCRP ratio differed between patients with and without CAD, although the association of this ratio with CAD was weaker than that of mCRP alone. Some studies previously demonstrated that the ratio of monomeric to pentameric forms of CRP was substantially elevated in some inflammatory autoimmune diseases, particularly adult-onset Still’s disease (29) and age-related macular degeneration (35). Another study demonstrated that a higher ratio of monomeric to pentameric CRP enabled researchers to differentiate between active and quiescent disease states in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (28).Furthermore, the mCRP and hsCRP levels demonstrated a weak positive correlation in the current study. Some studies previously demonstrated a positive or negative correlation between the mCRP and hsCRP levels. On the contrary, a number of studies reported the absence of a correlation between these two forms of CRP (17). hsCRP primarily detects pCRP, which is produced in hepatocytes and secreted into the bloodstream (3). The production of pCRP is regulated by proinflammatory cytokines, mainly interleukin-6. Interleukin-6 is a link of the central inflammatory cascade (2). This cascade leads to the transduction of inflammatory signaling from the NLRP3-inflammasome in damaged tissues through interleukin-1β and interleukin-6 to their ligand receptors (2, 36). NLRP3-inflammasome is activated under stimuli from endogenous damage-associated patterns (DAMPs), which include cholesterol crystals (37) and oxidized LDL (38, 39). The inflammasome converts pro-interleukin-1β into its active form, interleukin-1β, which is released from a number of cells to transcend complex signaling (36, 40). In particular, interleukin-1β stimulates the cellular release of interleukin-6. In its turn, interleukin-6 further transcends a wide range of stimuli, including the upregulation of pCRP production in hepatocytes (41). pCRP is considered the end product of the central inflammatory cascade (2). As such, pCRP is a biomarker that reflects the overall activity of the upstream links of this cascade (2, 36). mCRP is produced otherwise. One known pathway is the dissociation of pCRP (6, 42, 43). pCRP opsonizes the membranes of damaged and activated cells and their microparticles. There, pCRP undergoes dissociation into monomeric subunits (44). Another possible pathway of mCRP production is local synthesis. Macrophages and adipocytes have been shown to produce mCRP (45–48). Moreover, unlike pCRP, mCRP has been detected in damaged tissues in a number of histological studies (17, 43, 49). Therefore, the pathways of pCRP and mCRP production are at least partially different. This makes the relationship between mCRP and hsCRP levels non-linear, with alterations in different diseases and subsets of patients.This study comprised patients with premature CAD, which develops in younger individuals. This is an aggressive form of CAD that is associated with frequent acute cardiovascular events and high death rates, which cannot be restrained even by the rigorous control of traditional risk factors (50). In addition, recent clinical trials have demonstrated the remarkable effectiveness of anti-inflammatory agents in the prevention of cardiovascular events, with colchicine being introduced into cardiovascular prevention guidelines (1, 51). The assessment of residual inflammatory cardiovascular risk can confer a substantial benefit in this context. Currently, this risk is assessed using hsCRP levels, which reflect the activity of the central inflammatory cascade. The complementary evaluation of the local inflammatory response using mCRP levels could possibly aid in the assessment of residual inflammatory cardiovascular risk. 5ConclusionThis study revealed that mCRP levels exhibit an independent association with premature CAD, which was more pronounced than the association of hsCRP levels with premature CAD. Moreover, this association was present even in patients with hsCRP levels below 2.0 mg/L, in whom residual inflammatory risk should have been excluded.