2. Materials and MethodsWe used widely available proteins and antibodies to develop a contact-lens-based pseudo-immunofluorescence assay. In this study, we used lysozyme (Lys) (Cat. No. 89833, MW 14.38 kDa) and fluorescein-labeled lysozyme (F-Lys) (Cat. No. LS1-FC-1) from ThermoFisher Scientific (Chicago, IL, USA) and Nanocs (New York, NY, USA), respectively. Lys binds spontaneously to SiHG lenses, and we considered Lys or F-Lys to be the capture protein. We obtained the primary antibodies from Abcam (Waltham, MA, USA): unlabeled anti-lysozyme antibody (Anti-Lys) (Clone No. EPR2994(2), host-Mouse) and fluorescein-conjugated anti-lysozyme antibody (F-anti-Lys) (Clone No. LZ598-10G9, host-Mouse) (Figure 1B). The F-Lys Ab was the target antigen to be captured. As detection antibodies, rhodamine red-labeled goat anti-rabbit IgG (Rh-anti-IgG) (Cat. No. R-6394) and Alexa Fluor 647-labeled goat anti-human IgG (AF-anti-IgG) (Cat. No. A-21445) were obtained from ThermoFisher Scientific (Chicago, IL, USA). Phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), pH 7.2, was used for sample dilution and fluorescence measurements throughout this work.2.1. Selection of Silicone Hydrogel (SiHG) Contact LensWe selected commercially available and widely used silicone hydrogel (SiHG) Lotrafilcon A (Lot A) (Air Optix lenses from Alcon, Elkridge, MD, USA) contact lenses and Comfilcon A (ConA) Bioaffinity lenses from Cooper Vision. The SiHG lenses exhibited distinct chemical and physical characteristics, as detailed in the Supplementary Materials (Table S1). SiHG lenses contain continuous regions of silicone from the front to the back of the lens, and both are expected to have interface regions for hydrophobic binding (Figure S3). Notably, about 65% of new prescriptions are for these SiHG lenses . For comparison, Table S1 also lists properties for a standard hydrogel (HG) lens. HG lenses exhibit lower oxygen transport (Dk) and are worn for shorter periods of time. In previous reports, we showed that SiHG lenses can bind either hydrophobic species or highly charged poly-lysine . In the present report, we use lysozyme, which has a high positive charge and binds strongly to SiHG lenses. The experiments in this report were performed using the Lot A lenses, but similar results were obtained with the ConA lenses.2.2. Fluorescence MeasurementsFluorescence measurements were performed using a photon-counting spectrofluorometer, the FluoTime 300 from PicoQuant, GMBH. A pulsed laser diode was used at an excitation of 470 nm at 40 MHz using an amplified fiber laser for excitation at 532 nm. Some emission spectra and intensities were measured using a Varian Cary Eclipse 4 spectrofluorometer. Intensity and lifetime images of the lenses, and scans across the central axes of the lenses, were performed using an Alba 5 time-resolved laser scanning confocal microscope from Alba ISS Inc. (Champaign, IL, USA). Excitation was conducted at 473 nm using a 20× objective. A 25 nm pinhole was used for confocal measurements. The observed size was approximately 0.5 mm in diameter with 256 × 256 pixels. The scan across the lenses was measured at intervals of 0.5 mm over the 13 mm lens diameter, with the focus of the objective lens adjusted to the height (z-axis) location in the lens.