2.4DiscussionComorbidity refers to the total burden of any additional disease entity other than the specific index disease and may result from predisposing genetic or environmental factors or from treatment for IDDs. Comorbidity is prevalent among people with IDDs of the CNS, consistent with the rising prevalence of multimorbidity, estimated to affect approximately 40% of the European population. The prevalence of comorbidity not only signifies elevated mortality rates but also correlates with heightened healthcare resource utilization (17). Comorbidities may have decisive importance in terms of diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment effectiveness and safety. The scarcity of established modifiable risk factors for the burden of multimorbidity indicates that new knowledge is required to develop effective prevention and treatment strategies.The COMMIT research program focuses on the three best-defined IDDs: MS, NMOSD, and MOGAD. NMOSD and MOGAD are antibody-associated diseases of the CNS. In NMOSD, an autoantibody targets the astrocyte water channel AQP4 and defines NMOSD as a primary astrocytopathy in AQP4-IgG-positive cases (60, 61). In MOGAD, an autoantibody targets myelin antigens, i.e., MOG, which is produced by oligodendrocytes and thus is involved in demyelination (62). MS is thought to be an autoimmune disease and to be a mainly myelin-directed disease although causative specificities have not been identified, and considerable overlap may occur between MS and MOGAD. The goal of the present study is to assess whether comorbidity has an impact on the levels of proinflammatory and neurodegenerative mediators and in practical terms whether they influence OCT and MRI parameters and is associated with clinical outcome.In the COMMIT study, the patients with IDDs and comorbidity are the primary target group. This project advances the management of IDD patients with chronic comorbidities and may contribute to the pathogenesis of diseases. Identification of reliable biomarkers will allow evaluation of the impact of comorbidity on IDDs and enable early diagnosis and new therapeutic strategies. Our prospective multicenter study, which will be conducted over a 3-year follow-up period, aims to compile a detailed and systematic database for patients who exhibit various comorbid conditions.A strength of the study is the multicenter design, with longitudinal, consecutive follow-up with sample collection and a uniform protocol. Given the exhaustive nature of the study protocol, it can be particularly challenging for individuals with disabilities. We will introduce a streamlined, standardized assessment to ease follow-ups. With an adequate sample size, our objective is to curtail the effects of confounding. 3ConclusionIn conclusion, the intricate relationship between IDD and other chronic conditions represents an area for further research. The COMMIT study will address if the clinical and biochemical status of patients with MS, NMOSD, and MOGAD is affected by comorbid conditions. In addition, the study is cross-disciplinary, contributing to the characterization of disease mechanisms. The study will identify clinically relevant biomarkers, as well as address survival and quality of life. Recognizing the frequency and patterns of comorbidities and risk factors can be instrumental in developing preventive strategies. The results of the study are anticipated to have a strong and immediate impact on the perception and treatment of IDDs due to improvement in diagnostic and monitoring biomarkers.