MethodsWe analyzed 285 potential metabolic molecules from UK Biobank (UKB) for MG patients and identified elevated serum cystatin C (Cys-C). Validation was performed using laboratory data, ELISA, and clinical information from Chinese (CHN) acetylcholine receptor antibody (AChR-Ab) positive generalized MG (gMG) cohorts. We assessed cytokines/chemokines/complements and peripheral blood T lymphocytes using Luminex assays and flow cytometry. MG-relevant scores including myasthenia gravis activities of daily living score (MG-ADL) and quantitative myasthenia gravis score (QMG) were prospectively collected and retrospectively analyzed. The correlations between serum Cys-C and the ratio of T helper 1 (Th1)/Th2 were assessed. 2Methods2.1Screening for potential metabolic biomarkers for MG in UKBUKB is a large-scale, population-based prospective cohort study designed to investigate the genetic, environmental, and lifestyle determinants of a wide range of diseases and health outcomes (15), which has been relatively underutilized in research on MG to date. We retrieved 285 potential metabolic molecules that have been screened in patients with MG from UKB, including 30 from blood biochemistry, 251 from nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) metabolomics, and four from urine assays ( Supplementary Table 1 ). MG patients were identified using UKB codes 1260 and 1437 based on self-reported illness data (https://biobank.ndph.ox.ac.uk/ukb/field.cgi?id=20002). Descriptions provided by patients were verified by a clinician and, where possible, cross-referenced with entries in the coding tree. Only the baseline group (Instance 0) was used for analysis, as given the limited representation of MG cases in later instances. We categorized all participants (n = 502,409) by their illness code into three groups: (1) MG (n = 191), (2) Healthy control (HC, n = 118,493), and (3) Other diseases (defined as non-MG, n = 383,716). Subsequently, a primary screening was conducted by comparing the p-values of MG vs. HC, followed by a secondary comparison of MG vs. non-MG controls. The UKB received ethical approval from the North West Multicenter Research Ethics Committee, and all participants provided written informed consent. This study was performed under the UKB application number 19542.2.2Validation for the identified biomarker and cytokine measurement in MGFrom July to December 2024, 60 patients with anti-AChR-Ab generalized MG (gMG) were enrolled from the prospective registered cohort (NCT04535843), alongside 60 age- and sex-matched HCs. The study protocol was approved by the Ethics Committees of Huashan Hospital (2019–441 and 2022-913), and participants provided written informed consent. The basic demographic information and clinical features including sex, age at screening, onset age, thymoma status, thymectomy history, the clinical subtypes, myasthenia gravis activities of daily living score (MG-ADL), quantitative myasthenia gravis score (QMG), myasthenia gravis composite score (MGC), MG quality of life measure score (MG-QOL-15r) were collected (16–18). Peripheral blood serum samples were obtained from both MG patients and HCs and stored at -80°C refrigerator before analysis. MG patients were stratified into high-burden (MG-ADL score ≥6) and low-burden (MG-ADL <6) groups based on MG-ADL scores at enrollment (19).Serum Cys-C levels were measured using an ELISA kit (Beyotime, China; PC220 Human Cys-C ELISA Kit). Twenty-two cytokines, chemokines, and complements were selected based on a literature review, including TNF-α, IFN-α, IFN-β, IFN-γ, IL-4, IL-6, IL-18, IL-17, IL-23, IL-2, IL-10, IL-19, IL-8, CCL3, CXCL2, CXCL4, CXCL5, BAFF and APRIL, C2, C5a and C9 (20–22). These were analyzed using two independent Human Luminex Discovery Assay panels (R&D Systems). Plasma samples were transferred into wells containing immobilized antibodies that capture the target molecules of interest. The Luminex assay results were analyzed on a Luminex® 100/200™ instrument (Luminex Corporation). Cytokine measurements were obtained using a single replicate per sample, with values below the detection threshold recorded as 0 pg/ml. If more than 30% of cytokine results for a sample reported low quality, a backup plasma sample was retrieved and repeatedly tested.2.3Retrospective analysis of laboratory data in a Chinese MG cohortWe then retrospectively reviewed the laboratory biochemical data and the peripheral mononuclear cell flow cytometry from a Chinese cohort of gMG patients (n=120) and HCs (n=146) from the Department of Neurology, Huashan Hospital in 2024. HCs had no history of MG or other chronic inflammatory/autoimmune diseases. To eliminate the potential confounding effects of immunosuppressants on renal function, we enrolled the patients with treatment-naive gMG, as they had not received any immunotherapies at the time of assessment (n=35).Laboratory data collected included: (1) renal function indicators in blood metabolic panel such as serum Cys-C, estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR, calculated by CKD-EPI creatinine equation), blood urea nitrogen (BUN), and uric acid (UA) (23); and (2) peripheral blood T lymphocyte flow cytometry results, specifically the absolute counts of Th1 and Th2 cells and their relative proportions among Th cells. The Th cell subsets were identified as follows: Th: CD3+CD4+, Th1: CXCR3-CCR6-; Th2: CXCR3-CCR6+. All laboratory analyses were performed and reported by the same centralized laboratory at Huashan Hospital.2.4Statistical analysisContinuous variables were reported as mean ± standard deviation (SD) and compared using T-tests or analysis of variance (ANOVA). Categorical variables were reported as percentages (%) and compared using the chi-square test or Fisher’s exact test, depending on sample size. Correlation analysis was conducted using the Pearson method. In cases where multiple comparisons were made, the False Discovery Rate (FDR) method was applied to adjust p-values. The Wilcoxon signed-rank test was performed to compare differences between groups. 2.3Retrospective analysis of laboratory data in a Chinese MG cohortWe then retrospectively reviewed the laboratory biochemical data and the peripheral mononuclear cell flow cytometry from a Chinese cohort of gMG patients (n=120) and HCs (n=146) from the Department of Neurology, Huashan Hospital in 2024. HCs had no history of MG or other chronic inflammatory/autoimmune diseases. To eliminate the potential confounding effects of immunosuppressants on renal function, we enrolled the patients with treatment-naive gMG, as they had not received any immunotherapies at the time of assessment (n=35).Laboratory data collected included: (1) renal function indicators in blood metabolic panel such as serum Cys-C, estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR, calculated by CKD-EPI creatinine equation), blood urea nitrogen (BUN), and uric acid (UA) (23); and (2) peripheral blood T lymphocyte flow cytometry results, specifically the absolute counts of Th1 and Th2 cells and their relative proportions among Th cells. The Th cell subsets were identified as follows: Th: CD3+CD4+, Th1: CXCR3-CCR6-; Th2: CXCR3-CCR6+. All laboratory analyses were performed and reported by the same centralized laboratory at Huashan Hospital. 2.4Statistical analysisContinuous variables were reported as mean ± standard deviation (SD) and compared using T-tests or analysis of variance (ANOVA). Categorical variables were reported as percentages (%) and compared using the chi-square test or Fisher’s exact test, depending on sample size. Correlation analysis was conducted using the Pearson method. In cases where multiple comparisons were made, the False Discovery Rate (FDR) method was applied to adjust p-values. The Wilcoxon signed-rank test was performed to compare differences between groups. Supplementary materialThe Supplementary Material for this article can be found online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fimmu.2025.1578359/full#supplementary-material Supplementary Table 1Screening results of MG metabolic biomarkers in UKB.Supplementary Table 2Treatment options for 37 MG patients.