1. IntroductionHepatitis B virus (HBV) exerts a global disease burden with high morbidity and mortality. It is estimated that, globally, approximately 290 million people have chronic hepatitis B, and over 800,000 people die each year from infection-related causes . HBV attacks the liver and can cause both acute and chronic disease manifestations, such as cirrhosis, which increases the risk of liver cancer. The prevailing route of HBV transmission is through body fluids or blood from an infected person, which can occur, e.g., through sexual contact or from mother to child at birth . In total, 90% of infants and 30–50% of children younger than five years who are infected in the first years of life will develop a chronic infection. In contrast, only 5% of infected adults will develop chronic manifestations .Global meta-analyses highlight the continued need for the surveillance, control, and prevention of HBV infection. The worldwide estimate of HBV prevalence is between 2.5% and 5.6% across all ages . Although progress toward reducing HBV infections has been made, hepatitis B remains a substantial public health problem . Kyrgyzstan is one of the countries targeting the elimination of viral hepatitis. Since its independence from the former Soviet Union in 1991, the country has faced challenges in the health care system and an economic contraction . In the last few decades, however, improvements have led to a decline in HBV prevalence from 10% to 2.5–6.6% . For this, a major contribution was the introduction of immunization regimes with the hepatitis B vaccine at birth and their expansion to the whole country . Hence, it was suggested that Kyrgyzstan be reclassified, from a high to a lower-intermediate HBV endemic country . However, despite current policies, HBV prevalence among adults continues to be high, with an increasing trend with older age . Thus, preventive measures should be established to improve HBV vaccination coverage in this population, as well as for individuals at high risk. There are no studies investigating immune responses to HBV vaccines in Central Asia or factors that might influence vaccination outcomes. However, in clinical practice in the capital, Bishkek, a current challenge is that vaccinees often do not return for the third injection, presumably due to the long time interval between the second and third doses. Since the third dose is essential for the development of full HBV vaccine protection , this likely contributes to suboptimal HBV vaccine protection in the population. We hypothesized that a shorter time interval between the second and third dose could improve return rates for the third dose. However, before a simplified 0-1-3 scheme could be considered further for vaccine policy, it was critical to assess whether it would result in seroprotection equivalent to the traditional 0-1-6 scheme. Thus, we conducted a randomized trial of individuals aged 17–66 years in which we compared vaccine-conferred seroprotection between the traditional 0-1-6 scheme and a shorter 0-1-3 scheme. In addition, we investigated study protocol compliance and evaluated potential risk factors for an insufficient vaccine response.