DiscussionWe applied the Olink PEA, covering 356 proteins involved in thrombus formation, inflammation, and immune response, to 98 randomly selected patients with suspected HIT and confirmed the results with ELISA in the patients mentioned above and an additional data set of 47 patients. Among 40 proteins that were statistically significantly associated with HIT status in protein abundance analysis, soluble P-selectin remained significant after multiple test adjustments. This association was confirmed in a ROC analysis in PEA and ELISA (0.80 and 0.81, respectively). This association was especially apparent in patients without thrombosis, suggesting potential usefulness in this group.To our knowledge, this is the first investigation to apply the PEA technology to patients with suspected HIT, thus analyzing a large number of proteins potentially associated with immune-mediated thrombosis. Prior omics-based analyses primarily focused on genetic variants. Four genome-wide association studies investigated the risk factors of HIT and revealed genetic variants associated with various enzymes, the AB0 complex, and distinct receptor proteins.18,35, 36, 37 However, comprehensive studies including metabolomics, proteomics, and transcriptomics are still missing.18Our study suggests that soluble P-selectin holds potential as a diagnostic marker for HIT. P-selectin is a glycoprotein that is expressed in platelets and endothelial cells and is involved in leukocyte adhesion and thrombocyte aggregation.38 When platelets are activated, P-selectin is mobilized from the α-granules to the external membrane.39 In recent years, this mechanism has been leveraged to develop flow cytometry–based tests for activated platelets in patients suspected of having HIT. However, the diagnostic performance of these tests is limited.27,40 Besides, soluble P-selectin, which can be released into the bloodstream through proteolytic cleavage or alternative splicing, has been shown to be elevated in various cardiovascular and thrombotic disorders, including myocardial infarction, venous thrombosis, and COVID-19–related thrombosis.41, 42, 43, 44, 45 Thus, soluble P-selectin appears to be a general marker for platelet activation.46 Moreover, CD62P-mediated cross talk between the vessel wall, platelets, monocytes, and neutrophils results in the activation of innate immune cells and an increase in the expression of tissue factor. This initial activation of immune cells has the effect of thrombus reinforcement and retardation of subsequent resolution processes.32 Interestingly, our findings extend decades-old observations on increased values of soluble P-selectin in patients with HIT.47, 48, 49 However, these studies have methodological limitations, and soluble P-selectin was not yet considered a biomarker for HIT.Our study has several strengths. Most importantly, the patients were randomly selected from a population of patients with suspected HIT. This is closely resembling the target population for a potential diagnostic or prognostic test, including not only patients with confirmed HIT but also patients with H/PF4 antibodies and patients without HIT but with similar presenting diseases. As a consequence, contrasts are less pronounced compared with healthy controls but correspond to realistic clinical settings. In addition, we analyzed a large number of proteins in a relatively large cohort. Besides, the results obtained with the PEA were confirmed with an independent analytical technique (ELISA) and in a second data set. All of these points contribute to the high validity of the study.However, our study also has some limitations. Firstly, we excluded a certain proportion of patients due to incomplete clinical data or missing sample material. However, we consider these dropouts to be at least "at random" and thus unlikely to affect the results of the study. Secondly, the population was not consecutive because of the high costs of the PEA tests. Thus, we cannot fully exclude that a certain selection bias is present. One might additionally argue that a matching procedure according to age and sex would increase the validity of the results. To account for this, we included age and sex in the regression model. These limitations suggest that our results must be confirmed in an independent, larger cohort of consecutive patients. Such a diagnostic accuracy study would also have to be carried out with test systems that can be used in daily practice (eg, chemiluminescent immunoassay). Another limitation is that we have used serum rather than plasma. However, this limitation is minimized due to the differential analysis of the various groups using the same sample preparation process. In addition, a polyspecific rather than a immunoglobulin-specific ELISA was used. However, there are 3 reasons why this point did not introduce bias: (1) it is not a diagnostic accuracy study in which the performance of current tests is used as a comparison; (2) several studies have shown that the correlation between polyspecific and immunoglobulin-specific immunoassays is very high;13 and (3) this information is not included in the study either as an investigated variable or as an outcome variable.Our data confirm that soluble P-selectin is a promising new biomarker in patients with HIT. This fits with our current understanding of the mechanism of HIT, which recognizes platelet activation as an important feature. The concept of soluble P-selectin as a general biomarker for platelet activation is supported by comparable observations in many other thromboembolic diseases. Soluble P-selectin might be included in future diagnostic decision-support tools, thus adding information about platelet activation. The protein may be particularly useful in the diagnosis of HIT without thrombosis, which is a particularly challenging diagnostic situation. Furthermore, the differential concentration of soluble P-selectin in patients with and without thrombosis suggests its potential use as a prognostic marker. This is consistent with observations suggesting soluble P-selectin as a prognostic marker for thromboembolism in COVID-19.45 However, our findings must be confirmed in future studies, prospectively including patients with suspected HIT.In conclusion, our analysis of 356 proteins associated with thrombus formation, inflammation, and immune response in a representative study of patients with suspected HIT has provided evidence supporting the potential of soluble P-selectin as a promising new biomarker. Because this was particularly apparent in patients without thrombosis, a potential application appears not only as a diagnostic but also as a prognostic biomarker. Nevertheless, further validation of our findings in diverse settings and populations is warranted, necessitating prospective studies that include patients with suspected HIT.