The applicability of the specific human IgG antibody response to Anopheles gambiae salivary Gland Protein-6 peptide 1 (gSG6-P1 salivary peptide) as a biomarker able to distinguish the level of exposure to mosquito bites according to seasonal variations has not yet been evaluated in Central African regions. The study aimed to provide the first reliable data on the IgG anti-gSG6-P1 response in rural area in Cameroon according to the dry- and rainy-season. Between May and December 2020, dry blood samples were collected from people living in the Bankeng village in the forest area of the Centre region of Cameroon. Malaria infection was determined by thick-blood smear microscopy and multiplex PCR. The level of IgG anti-gSG6-P1 response, was assessed by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Anopheles density and aggressiveness were assessed using human landing catches. The prevalence of malaria infection remains significantly higher in the rainy season than in the dry season (77.57% vs 61.44%; p = 0.0001). The specific anti-gSG6-P1 IgG response could be detected in individuals exposed to few mosquito bites and showed inter-individual heterogeneity even when living in the same exposure area. In both seasons, the level of anti-gSG6-P1 IgG response was not significantly different between Plasmodium infected and non-infected individuals. Mosquito bites were more aggressive in the rainy season compared to the dry season (human biting rate-HBR of 15.05 b/p/n vs 1.5 b/p/n) where mosquito density was very low. Infected mosquitoes were found only during the rainy season (sporozoite rate = 10.63% and entomological inoculation rate-EIR = 1.42 ib/p/n). The level of IgG anti-gSG6-P1 response was significantly higher in the rainy season and correlated with HBR (p ˂ 0.0001). This study highlights the high heterogeneity of individual’s exposure to the Anopheles gambiae s.l vector bites depending on the transmission season in the same area. These findings reinforce the usefulness of the anti-gSG6-P1 IgG response as an accurate immunological biomarker for detecting individual exposure to Anopheles gambiae s.l. bites during the low risk period of malaria transmission in rural areas and for the differentiating the level of exposure to mosquitoes.