DiscussionOur data support the quantification of MuSK antibodies by flow cytometry. Through a multimodal investigational approach, we showed that total MuSK-IgG levels, MuSK-IgG4 and MuSK-IgG2 levels, and MuSK-IgG affinity may represent promising biomarkers of disease outcomes in MuSK-MG. DiscussionIn this study, we assessed the correlation between MuSK-MG clinical status and pathogenic antibodies' serum level, IgG subclasses, and affinity to find candidate biomarkers of disease severity and outcomes. We found that total MuSK-IgG and MuSK-IgG4 levels correlate with disease severity at the interindividual level when quantified by FACS. In addition, in longitudinal samples from individual patients, their reduction, along with the reduction of MuSK-IgG2, was associated with a favorable response to treatment, potentially representing a novel clinical biomarker that could help guide treatment choices.Our results are in line with previous studies, which found a good correlation of MuSK antibody titers measured by RIA or ELISA with clinical severity and outcomes.10,11,19 Of interest, similar findings were observed with antibodies targeting the MuSK Ig1 domain by ELISA, levels of which correlated with disease status intraindividually and interindividually.20 Antibody detection by FACS is a high-throughput technique that provides quantitative and highly sensitive results. We here demonstrate that the measurement of MuSK-IgG levels by FACS strongly correlates with RIA antibody titers, confirming previous results,21 whereas no correlation was found with ELISA titers. This finding is possibly explained by the non-native presentation of MuSK in absence of its transmembrane domain or the induction of conformational changes due to the adsorption of MuSK on ELISA plates. On the contrary, measurement of antibody levels by CBA end-point titration showed only a weak correlation with clinical severity, in line with the semiquantitative nature of this assay. Our data also showed that, within the same patient, MuSK-IgG levels decreased paralleling clinical improvement, either as measured by FACS or using CBA end-point titers. Similar findings were confirmed in RTX-treated patients. Altogether, these data support the FACS-based quantification of MuSK antibody levels as an efficient screening tool for diagnosing and monitoring MuSK-MG and a valuable single tool to screen and monitor all patients with MG. Owing to the observed discrepancies between FACS and ELISA MuSK antibody quantification, we caution the use of ELISA.When assessing MuSK-specific IgG isotypes, we found that MuSK-IgG4 levels correlate with disease severity, in line with previous reports.11 Of interest, when assessing response to conventional treatment, a reduction not only of MuSK-IgG4 but also of MuSK-IgG2 was associated with achievement of a favorable clinical outcome, a novel finding that requires further investigation. The lack of correlation between IgG2 levels and disease severity, despite its association with disease outcomes, could be due to both the relatively low frequency of MuSK-IgG2 and the use of different clinical scales to define severity and outcomes. Quantification of MuSK-IgG2 levels in larger samples of symptomatic patients is needed to clarify this point and to definitively prove the potential clinical usefulness of this serologic parameter. A trend toward a reduction of MuSK-IgG4 and MuSK-IgG2 was also observed in the subgroup of RTX-treated patients, further confirming that common immunobiological mechanisms underlie clinical improvement in most cases, irrespective of the treatment. This subanalysis likely did not reach statistical significance due to the low sample size; thus, validation of these findings in a larger patient cohort is needed. A switch in the predominant MuSK antibody subclass from IgG4 to IgG1 in association with the achievement of clinical remission has been so far reported in 2 patients.2,11 In our cohort, we observed a similar event in 1 patient who switched from IgG4 to IgG1 when achieving symptom remission while total MuSK-IgG and MuSK-IgG4 levels remained stable. Notwithstanding that this observation was limited to 1 patient, this finding could suggest that, in some cases, clinical remission may be driven by a de novo differentiation of IgG1+ B cells from the naïve B-cell pool or recruitment of IgG1-switched memory cells.22 The immunobiological mechanisms underlying the unusual preferential recruitment of IgG1+ instead of IgG4+ MuSK-specific B cells need further investigations.Measurement of autoantibody affinity was possible in a very limited number of serum samples. In contrast to the successful application of this method for the characterization of the humoral response against SARS-CoV-2,23 MuSK autoantibody affinity was generally tighter than can be characterized using the technique, thus preventing quantification. This is likely due to a longer (chronic) exposure to the autoantigen and the associated extensive affinity maturation, compared with infectious diseases. Nonetheless, our data show that, in 1 patient not receiving immunotherapy, MuSK antibody affinity increased in parallel with symptom exacerbation while MuSK-IgG and MuSK-IgG4 levels remained stable, suggesting that affinity maturation was a driver of clinical worsening and confirming that affinity maturation is a key step for MuSK antibody pathogenicity, as already demonstrated.24 Despite being limited to a single observation, our findings support this paradigm and highlight how a multimodal investigational approach, including the quantification of antibody affinity, may provide deeper insights into the complex immunobiology of autoimmune disorders and could lead to the identification of novel serologic biomarkers of clinical outcomes.This study has limitations inherent to its retrospective design and the relatively small sample size, the latter factor being explained by the rarity of the disorder. Moreover, this study was not powered for (nor aimed to) a cross-sectional analysis for the identification of the demographic and clinical factors associated with positive outcomes, which awaits to be investigated in the future. Nonetheless, through the comprehensive evaluation of MuSK antibody levels and their IgG subclasses, we could confirm that measurement of total MuSK-IgG and MuSK-IgG4 levels represents a valuable biomarker of disease severity and outcomes and can guide treatment choices. Upon validation in prospective studies, a reduction of MuSK-IgG (or IgG4) could be used as a serologic biomarker to support immunotherapy tapering or suspension. In addition, our data suggest a potential contribution of MuSK-IgG2 antibodies to the disease pathogenesis that deserves further investigations. Finally, our results support the use of flow cytometry–assessed live CBA for the quantification of MuSK-IgG and its subclasses. Multicenter prospective studies are needed to confirm our results and identify reliable, predictive biomarkers that can support a personalized treatment approach in this disorder.