BACKGROUNDTau‐derived cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) biomarkers correlate with amyloid‐beta (Aβ) plaques or tau tangles in Alzheimer's disease (AD). This study assessed the effects of long‐term anti‐Aβ antibodies on amyloid plaques, tau tangles, and CSF tau species to determine the relationships between them. 1BACKGROUNDRecent studies in dominantly inherited Alzheimer's disease (DIAD) and sporadic AD (sAD) suggest a sequence of changes in CSF and blood tau‐related measures that correlate with and bridge Aβ‐plaque and neurofibrillary tangle pathologies. 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 Relatively early increased phosphorylation of three specific sites (217, 231, and 181) correlates with Aβ‐PET positivity, followed after by increased phosphorylation of site 205 before symptom onset; later, levels of the microtubule binding region tau 243 fragment (MTBR‐tau243) and non‐phosphorylated tau increase near the time of clinical symptom onset, in parallel with tau‐PET signal increases. 1 , 6 , 7 , 8 The initial rise of soluble phospho‐tau, decades before the expected onset of clinical symptoms and years before substantial neurofibrillary tangles (NFT) are present, has generated uncertainty about the clinical and pathological meaning of the initial phospho‐tau species. 9 , 10 Soluble p‐tau217, p‐tau231 and p‐tau181 species seem to correlate more closely with Aβ‐plaque pathology than with hyperphosphorylated NFT pathology. Related to this, Aβ‐plaque‐lowering therapies appear to reduce levels of some blood and CSF phospho‐tau species. 11 , 12 , 13 , 14 , 15 , 16 Clearly, natural history and interventional studies suggest causal links between the increase in certain soluble phospho‐tau measures and Aβ‐plaque pathology. However, a comprehensive assessment of soluble phospho‐tau levels before and after removing aggregated Aβ is needed to validate which phospho‐tau isoforms are markers of Aβ‐plaque pathology vs. tau tangle pathology.The identification of soluble tau related biomarkers that rise in parallel with NFT pathology supports the original notion that levels of some forms of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) tau reflect the release of aggregated tau pathology, rather than a response to established Aβ‐plaque pathology. These forms of tau include p‐tau205, and fragments that include the non‐phosphorylated N‐terminal domain and the central proline‐rich domain (known as total tau, t‐tau), or the microtubule binding repeat (MTBR) domain. 6 , 8 , 17 , 18 Compared to most phospho‐tau species, p‐tau205, t‐tau, and MTBR‐tau243 appear to have stronger correlations with clinical symptoms, cerebral atrophy, and tau‐PET and, thus, may serve as a surrogate measure of clinical symptomatology. Yet, the recent studies demonstrating a decrease in Aβ‐plaque pathology have not shown clear evidence of an influence on NFT burden by tau PET, nor evaluated these recently identified soluble tau biomarkers including relative abundance of p‐tau measured as ptau/tau ratios (%p‐tau). Interventional studies are needed to assess the relationships between soluble tau‐related biomarkers, Aβ‐plaques, and NFTs.Previously, we have shown that gantenerumab (an Aβ‐plaque targeting therapy), but not solanezumab (a Aβ‐monomer targeted therapy) substantially reduced Aβ‐plaques in DIAD. 15 In this study, we explored the effect of both drugs on the longitudinal rate of change of multiple CSF soluble tau‐related biomarkers and tau PET in individuals with DIAD in the Dominantly Inherited Alzheimer Network Trials Unit (DIAN‐TU) 001 study. Based on our and other trial results, 19 we hypothesized that Aβ‐plaque reduction would associate with a selective normalization of initial‐changing soluble tau biomarkers; whereas, consistent with the absence of a change in tau PET signal, later changing soluble tau biomarkers would be unaffected by Aβ‐plaque reduction.