ConclusionsElevated PsEVs, upregulated amyloid-β (1–42), and p-Tau expression show high diagnostic accuracy in AD. The downregulated synaptophysin expression and upregulated neuroinflammatory markers in AD and MCI patients suggest potential synaptic degeneration and neuroinflammation. These findings support the potential of PsEV-associated biomarkers for AD diagnosis and highlight synaptic dysfunction and neuroinflammation in disease progression. DiscussionIn this study, we aimed to investigate the capacity of PsEVs to mirror pathological processes linked to AD and MCI. sEVs are extensively documented in the propagation of pathological processes associated with neurodegenerative and metabolic disorders . The increased secretion of sEVs, coupled with the transmission of disease-related pathologies through sEVs-associated cargo, makes sEVs a viable candidate for understanding the physiological state of their originating cells, which is reflected in sEVs cargo . To isolate the PsEVs, we employed a combined approach involving chemical precipitation followed by ultrafiltration, which effectively eliminates co-precipitants and minute protein contaminants such as albumin and LDL. We employed the neuronal protein L1CAM as a marker to ascertain the neuronal origin, although there is a debate surrounding its specificity for neuronal origin . Nevertheless, in our study, the L1CAM marker is used to check for protein markers and not to confirm L1CAM affinity-based isolation. A two-step filtration procedure was used to accompany the sEV isolation method in our study to ensure high purity. Spherical lipid bi-layered vesicles within the typical size range of small extracellular vesicles (30–150 nm) were observed across AD, MCI, and AMC subjects (Fig. 1A–C). NTA was employed to study the size distribution of sEVs in AD, MCI, and AMC. We observed that the isolated PsEVs come within the size range of < 200 nm, and there was a notable increase in the number of particles in diseased conditions compared to the control group. (Fig. 1D–G).Validation using sEVs-specific markers (CD63, CD81, and TSG101) demonstrated a noteworthy upregulation in MCI and AD, indicating PsEVs numbers are increased in disease conditions (Fig. 2A–D). Levels of sEV-specific markers in AD and MCI are elevated because PsEV numbers are increased in the disease condition. As documented by various studies in MCI and AD, there is an increase in cross-talk between different pathophysiological processes, which leads to an increase in sEVs number and sEVs specific marker as a cellular response to heightened cellular stress aggravating neuronal damage and synaptic dysfunction . Neuroinflammation, a characteristic feature of AD and MCI, may lead to the release of sEVs with inflammatory markers. Synaptic dysfunction, evidenced by synaptic degeneration, could contribute to the increased sEV-specific markers, reflecting vesicle release in response to altered synaptic activity . Additionally, cells undergoing stress might activate compensatory mechanisms, and the elevated sEV-specific markers could signify communication for potential repair or damage mitigation. Therefore, the increase in sEV-specific markers may be linked to the progression of neurodegenerative processes, indicating ongoing pathological changes in the brain as the disease progresses. Additionally, the elevated expression of L1CAM, a neuron-associated marker, in MCI and AD further strengthens the association between PsEVs and neurodegenerative processes (Fig. 2E). Furthermore, our observations extend beyond AD and MCI, showing increased concentrations of sEVs in other health conditions where higher levels of these vesicles correlate with elevated levels of disease markers [53–55]. The results of our research provide valuable insight into the characterization, validation, and functional implications of plasma-derived small extracellular vesicles (PsEVs) in the context of AD and MCI. Our comprehensive analysis encompassed morphological, biochemical, and functional aspects, shedding light on the potential role of PsEVs as biomarkers and contributors to neurodegenerative processes.For this purpose, we performed the ELISA of amyloid-β (1–42) in PsEVs, where we observed higher protein concentrations of amyloid-β (1–42) in MCI. At the same time, in AD, the concentration also significantly increased (Fig. 3A). In a similar study by A. Manolopoulos et al. , they studied levels of Aβ42, total Tau, and pro-brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) in both plasma neuron-derived extracellular vesicles (NDEVs) and plasma. The study reported a lack of correlation between the plasma and NDEVs, substantiating concerns about levels of the Aβ42 and total Tau measured in plasma originating from non-CNS sources. Multiple studies support the involvement of extracellular vesicles (EVs) in AD pathogenesis, where Aβ and Tau are released in association with EVs, influencing neuronal cell death and trans-synaptic spreading of the disease . A progressive elevation in PsEV levels of p-Tau was observed in MCI, reaching a significantly higher AD concentration (Fig. 3E). Previous research has revealed that p-tau alone effectively differentiates Frontotemporal Dementia (FTD) from AD with high specificity . In our study, the alone analysis of p-Tau and amyloid-β (1–42) proved effective in distinguishing patients with MCI from AMC (Table 2). Consequently, studies have reported that the elevation of p-Tau suggests the future likelihood of AD development . This dual elevation in amyloid-β (1–42) and p-Tau levels highlights their potential utility as concurrent biomarkers associated with MCI and AD diagnosis, as indicated by our ROC analysis. Therefore, the investigation into PsEV content revealed significant alterations in key markers associated with AD pathology, viz., amyloid-β (1–42) and p-Tau, which are a well-established marker of AD and exhibit an elevated level in PsEVs from AD and MCI patients compared to AMC in our study.Synaptic dysfunction is considered a core feature of AD. It is suggested to precede other pathophysiological events of AD rather than neurodegeneration, which manifests during the later stages of the disease . Synaptic dysfunction interacts with other core pathophysiology events of AD, such as the amyloid-β cascade, tau pathology, and neuroinflammation, eventually progressing to irreversible neurodegeneration and atrophy . In this context, the synchronized exchange of proteins involved in these pathological processes between the CNS and neuronal-derived sEVs highlights the potential of sEVs as reliable carriers of pathophysiological cascade occurring at the pathological site . In Fig. 3U, we observed downregulated synaptophysin levels, a synaptic vesicle marker, in AD PsEVs compared to MCI and AMC. This suggests synaptic degeneration, which has also been discussed in several studies . Synaptic damage induced by amyloid-β deposition triggers a response from the glia to eliminate impaired synapses. As amyloid-β accumulates, the severity of synaptic dysfunction intensifies, leading to tau hyperphosphorylation and the formation of tau tangles. Our study’s findings contradict J. Utz et al. (2021), which showed increased synaptophysin levels in microvesicles isolated from cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) in AD . This discrepancy could be due to different biofluid sources, cellular origins, or clearance mechanisms for synaptophysin in these compartments. Our study also differs from Utz J et al. (2021) as we have studied PsEVs compared to microvesicles; both differ in biogenesis, structure, and functions. Moreover, our study aligns with existing studies that reported lower synaptophysin levels in plasma neuronal-derived EVs. Goetzl et al.  investigated the synaptic protein levels in neuronal-derived exosomes in plasma (NDEs) of patients with FTD and AD, where the authors found significantly lower levels of synaptopodin, neurogranin, synaptophysin, and synaptotagmin-2 in both conditions compared to controls. Furthermore, our results also align with the overall synaptic loss seen in AD patient’s brains, where lower levels of synaptophysin in the hippocampus have been reported to correlate with cognitive decline in AD . Our study found that no significant difference in synaptophysin levels between MCI and AMC was observed, indicating that synapse dysfunction is more pronounced due to neuronal loss in the advanced disease stage, and its indication is reflected in PsEVs. Since the PsEVs pool also contains neuronal-derived EVs, we interpolate that the reduction in synaptic proteins in brain tissue is reflected in our results.IL-1β, a potent immunomodulating cytokine, has previously been identified as a trigger for various inflammatory mediators in astrocytes and neurons . Consistent evidence from post-mortem AD brain studies indicates the prevalent overexpression of IL-1β, with immunohistochemical analyses revealing its localization to microglia around plaques . Moreover, pro-inflammatory markers (IL-1β and TNF-α) were significantly higher in PsEVs from AD and MCI subjects, as evidenced by ELISA and Western blot findings in our study (Fig. 3I and M). Table 3 summarizes the correlation between PsEVs and neuroinflammatory markers. IL-1β plays a direct role in the pathophysiological changes associated with AD owing to its specific expression in the vicinity of plaques, and this localization suggests IL-1β as a mediator in the formation of plaques and tangles, thereby contributing to AD pathology . TNF-α, another pro-inflammatory cytokine primarily secreted by activated macrophages and microglia, is recognized for its dual role in promoting cell survival and death in the central nervous system .The cytoskeletal GFAP is found in astrocytic cells . Increased plasma GFAP levels could result from “reactive astrogliosis,” another term for aberrant astrocytic function brought on by damage to neurons . According to research on animal and cell models, reactive astrocytes encircle and penetrate amyloid-β plaques, contributing to the amyloid-β pathological process . Research has demonstrated a correlation between amyloid-β burden, cognitive decline, and plasma GFAP . PsEVs of GFAP were elevated in AD  and MCI (Fig. 3Q). It is well known that sEVs play a pivotal role in the progression of disease pathologies in neurodegenerative and metabolic diseases . The high levels of neuro-inflammatory markers (GFAP, TNF-α, and IL-1β) in PsEVs from MCI and AD subjects suggest a potential role of PsEVs in neuroinflammation. This activation of astrocytes and microglia precedes increased secretion of pro-inflammatory PsEVs and may contribute to neuronal damage and progressive cognitive impairment. Diseased conditions involve an increased secretion of sEVs and the cargo they carry, including pathological hallmark proteins or immunomodulatory cytokines .Correlation analyses unveiled positive associations between PsEVs concentration and the protein levels of amyloid-β (1–42), p-Tau, IL-1β, TNF-α, GFAP, and synaptophysin (Fig. 4). Furthermore, our study also analyzed the correlation between cognitive examination scores (ACE-III and MMSE) and PsEV-associated protein levels (Fig. 5). The negative correlations observed imply that lower cognitive scores align with elevated levels of amyloid-β (1–42), p-Tau, IL-1β, and TNF-α in PsEVs Table 3. This implies a strong connection between PsEV biomarkers and cognitive decline, reinforcing that PsEVs could serve as valuable diagnostic and prognostic tools. These findings underscore the potential of PsEVs as reliable disease progression and pathology indicators. The robust correlations further support the hypothesis that PsEVs may actively participate in disseminating neurodegenerative signals.Our study extensively studied the multiple pathophysiological processes associated with AD by checking the protein levels involved in these processes within PsEVs, including amyloid-β (1–42), p-Tau, neuroinflammatory markers (IL-1β, TNF-α, GFAP), and synaptic protein levels. This comprehensive approach enhances diagnostic accuracy by considering the synergistic effects of these processes, providing valuable insights into disease progression from MCI to AD. We have also performed a systematic comparison with MCI, which was lacking in previous studies. We observed a significant correlation between these investigated protein levels within PsEVs and neuropsychological tests, thus filling a research gap addressing the clinical relevance of these dysregulated pathophysiological processes. The observed downregulated synaptophysin levels in AD PsEVs compared to MCI and control subjects shed light on the combined role of neuroinflammation and proteinopathy in the cognitive decline observed as the disease progresses. This finding suggests that PsEVs may reflect synaptic degeneration, opening avenues for further exploration into the role of PsEVs in synaptic damage and dysfunction in neurodegenerative diseases. ConclusionsOur study provides a multifaceted examination of PsEVs, offering compelling evidence of their potential as biomarkers and functional contributors in AD. We have comprehensively discussed the synergistic role of synaptic dysfunction and neuroinflammation and their association with amyloid-β and tau pathologies within the PsEVs in AD progression. The pathophysiological conditions in the MCI and AD brain are reflected in PsEVs, as observed by the increased concentration of PsEVs containing disease-associated markers and markers for synaptic dysfunction and neuroinflammation. Therefore, the PsEVs can be exploited to understand the pathophysiological process involved in the progression and severity of MCI and AD.