Despite control efforts, the global malaria burden remains high. Plasmodium falciparum, transmitted by Anopheles mosquitoes, causes the most severe disease manifestations . Accurate transmission measures can estimate burden and observe changes in transmission risk. Common metrics of transmission include the human biting rate (HBR; the rate at which humans are bitten by mosquitoes) and sporozoite rate (the proportion of mosquito salivary glands with sporozoites), whose product is the entomological inoculation rate (EIR), the number of infectious mosquito bites a person receives over time . Though EIR is considered the gold-standard malaria transmission metric, EIR is costly and difficult to routinely and systematically estimate (especially in low-transmission areas), may be imprecise, and differs based on mosquito catch methods .Human antibodies to Plasmodium antigens have been used as biomarkers for malaria burden and changes in transmission, especially in low-transmission settings [2–7]. Antibodies to mosquito salivary gland extracts (SGEs) have also been investigated as biomarkers of exposure to mosquito bites. Immunoglobulin G (IgG) responses to SGEs have correlated with mosquito density  and host malaria infection status . Beyond whole SGEs, specific mosquito salivary antigens (MSAs) have been used as biomarkers for Anopheles HBR and malaria transmission . Individual proteins investigated include SG6 [7, 12–18] and the D7 protein family . Whole SGEs and specific MSAs have been investigated in Anopheles (An. gambiae [7, 9, 10, 12–18], An. funestus , An. albimanus , and An. darlingi  mosquitoes), Aedes , and Culex  mosquitoes. Antibodies to SG6 are associated with human exposure to malaria vector bites , including the heterogeneity of mosquito biting in different geographical settings and between rainy and dry seasons , and can show changes in response to control interventions .This study investigates 4 additional MSAs with potential to serve as biomarkers specifically for infected mosquito exposure based on their reported characteristics in pathogenesis studies in human and/or mice Plasmodium transmission studies: An. gambiae sporozoite-associated protein (AgSAP, AGAP004803), An. gambiae TRIO (AgTRIO, AGAP001374) , mosquito gamma interferon–inducible lysosomal thiol reductase (mosGILT, AGAP004551), and sporozoite-associated mosquito saliva protein 1 (SAMSP1, AGAP013726) . Three of these proteins, AgSAP, mosGILT, and SAMSP1, were found to be directly associated with Plasmodium sporozoites during transmission and are expressed in salivary glands . AgSAP modulates the human immune response and facilitates the transmission of Plasmodium . SAMSP1 facilitates sporozoite movement and decreases neutrophil chemotaxis, which facilitates Plasmodium sporozoite transmission . Unlike AgSAP or SAMSP1, incubation with mosGILT reduced sporozoite cell traversal and lowered Plasmodium transmission . In humans, people in a malaria-endemic area in Senegal had higher IgG reactivity to AgSAP and SAMSP1 than people in a nonendemic area . AgTRIO was identified from SGE antiserum when probing with a cDNA yeast surface display library encoding An. gambiae proteins . AgTRIO is highly expressed in saliva, and Plasmodium berghei–infected female An. gambiae had higher expression of AgTRIO than uninfected mosquitoes . Interestingly, people from a malaria-endemic area in Senegal did not have significantly higher IgG AgTRIO reactivity IgG than people in a nonendemic area .Because AgSAP and AgTRIO show increased expression in Plasmodium-infected mosquitoes, we hypothesize that serological responses to these proteins may be higher after exposure to infected versus uninfected mosquitoes .Here, we leverage a multiplex assay to investigate the human humoral IgG response to sporozoite-associated MSAs as quantitative biomarkers for Plasmodium-infected mosquito exposure. Multiplex approaches are highly sensitive, allow for detection of multiple serological markers using small sample volumes , and are useful for high-throughput serological analyses for disease surveillance . We investigate serological responses in longitudinal and cross-sectional cohorts from areas of low (Thiès, Senegal, with an EIR <5 infectious bites per person per year [32–34]) and moderate endemicity (Kédougou, Senegal, with an EIR ∼250 ), and among people with and without documented recent malaria infection. We specifically sought to determine whether people with active or recent infection have higher serological responses, which could indicate that these antigens could serve as biomarkers of exposure to Plasmodium-infected mosquitoes.MATERIALS AND METHODSCohortsDetails from all cohorts used in the study are contained in the Supplementary Methods.Recombinant Protein Expression and Peptide SynthesisExpression of recombinant mosGILT and SAMSP1 has been described previously . The AgTRIO and AgSAP sequences were designed for optimal expression using baculovirus and then subcloned into pFastBac1 . The SG6-P1 peptide was synthesized by Genscript. The protein and peptide expression and purification are presented in detail in the Supplementary Methods, and sizes of proteins verified by sodium dodecyl sulphate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis are shown in Supplementary Figure 3.Coupling Antigens to BeadsMagPlex COOH-microspheres (Luminex, Austin, Texas) were conjugated to each purified antigen using standard coupling conditions outlined in the xMAP cookbook (see details in the Supplementary Methods).Multiplex Magnetic Bead AssayWe tested IgG responses to SG6, AgSAP, AgTRIO, mosGILT, and SAMSP1 in a magnetic bead-based assay on the Bio-Rad Multiplex using the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention multiplex assay procedure , presented in detail in the Supplementary Methods.Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent AssayOn a subset of samples, a standard enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) with AgSAP and AgTRIO IgG was conducted as described previously  for comparison with the multiplex bead assay and is presented in detail in the Supplementary Methods.Proteins Homologous StudyHomology of saliva proteins in different mosquito species were shown using BLASTp (details in the Supplementary Methods).Statistical AnalysisDetails of statistical analysis are described in the Supplementary Methods and in corresponding figure legends. Analysis was conducted and figures were made in R 4.2.2 and GraphPad Prism 9.3.0 software.RESULTSDemographicsReactivity in 164 Senegalese individuals were tested for AgSAP, AgTRIO, mosGILT, and SAMSP1: 33 from low-transmission Thiès (EIR <5 ), all malaria-infected at enrollment; and 131 from moderate-transmission Kédougou (EIR ∼250 ), 72 infected and 59 uninfected at enrollment (Table 1). The Thiès cohort was followed for 2 years and includes an average of 6.8 samples per individual. All samples from Kédougou were collected during the malaria transmission season. Uninfected samples came from a cross-sectional study. For comparison, 80 healthy healthcare workers (HCWs) from a nonendemic area were tested. Experiments were repeated to allow SG6 to be compared to the 4 proteins (using samples tested described in Supplementary Table 1), with SG6 results presented in Figure 1 and data from the 4 proteins presented in Supplementary Figures 1 and 2.Figure 1. A, Mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) of immunoglobulin G (IgG) responses separated by cohort to SG6-P1, with geometric means shown by bars, 95% confidence intervals (CIs) shown by whiskers, and individual responses shown by dots. Cohorts are split by malaria transmission (Thiès is a low-transmission area with an entomological inoculation rate [EIR] <5 infectious bites per person per year, and Kédougou is an area of moderate malaria transmission with an EIR ∼250 infectious bites per person per year) and time relative to malaria infection (acute are samples from the time of malaria infection, recent are samples collected 2–4 weeks after malaria infection, transmission are samples collected from uninfected individuals during the malaria transmission season, and non-transmission are samples collected from uninfected individuals outside of the malaria transmission season). HCW is a cohort of healthcare workers from the United States who have not been exposed to malaria-infected mosquitoes. Heatmaps above each bar plot show significant differences between groups of linear mixed models of log-transformed MFI of post hoc pairwise comparisons adjusting P values with the Tukey method. X's indicate that comparisons were not performed. B, IgG MFI shown longitudinally by individual from Thiès and Kédougou for SG6-P1. Timepoints with infection are shown in red (day 0 and reinfection for Thiès, and day 0 for Kédougou), and timepoints without infection are shown in black. Malaria transmission seasons are shown in green. Blue line shows the geometric mean at each timepoint, and light blue shows the 95% CIs for the geometric mean (calculated excluding reinfection timepoints for Thiès).Table 1.Demographics of Cohorts for Samples Tested for AgSAP, AgTRIO, mosGILT, and SAMSP1CohortHCW (Cross-sectional)Thiès Infected (Longitudinal)Kédougou Infected (Cross-sectional and Longitudinal)aKédougou Transmission (Cross-sectional)Malaria transmission intensity of region EIR (infectious bites per person per year)No transmission<5 (32)∼250 (33)∼250 (33)Demographics No. of subjects803372a59 Age, y, mean (range)34.0 (22–74)10.6 (5–15)20.4 (2–74)21.3 (1–74) Sex Female65 (81.3)0 (0)32 (44.4)30 (50.8) Male15 (18.8)33 (100)38 (52.8)29 (49.2) Unknown0 (0)0 (0)2 (2.8)0 (0)Samples by timepoint Uninfected cross-sectional80 (100)……59 (100) Day 0…33 (14.6)71 (74.0)… Week 2…31 (13.7)13 (13.5)… Week 4…32 (14.2)12 (12.5)… Month 3…30 (13.3)…… Month 6…12 (5.3)…… Month 12…32 (14.2)…… Month 18…29 (12.8)…… Month 24…23 (10.2)…… Reinfection…4 (1.8)……Data are presented as No. (%) unless otherwise indicated.Abbreviations: AgSAP, Anopheles gambiae sporozoite-associated protein; AgTRIO, Anopheles gambiae TRIO; EIR, entomological inoculation rate; HCW, healthcare worker; mosGILT, mosquito gamma interferon–inducible lysosomal thiol reductase; SAMSP1, sporozoite-associated mosquito saliva protein 1. aThis group includes 16 longitudinal subjects, each sampled at a minimum of 2 timepoints, and 56 cross-sectional subjects.Antibodies to AgSAP and AgTRIO Are Higher in Malaria-Endemic AreasHuman antibody responses to AgSAP and AgTRIO were significantly higher among people with acute and recent infection from both Kédougou and Thiès compared to the HCW cohort (for AgSAP: all P < .025; for AgTRIO: all P < .001; Supplementary Table 2). Additionally, AgTRIO mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) was higher among Thiès nontransmission season samples compared to HCW MFI (P = .0007), as was AgSAP MFI in uninfected people from Kédougou during the malaria transmission season (P = .0245) and AgTRIO MFI in uninfected individuals in both Thiès and Kédougou during the malaria transmission season (both P < .001) (Figure 2A and 2B). Overall, AgSAP and AgTRIO MFI was moderately correlated (Spearman correlation ρ = 0.636; P < .0001; Supplementary Figure 5).Figure 2.Mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) of immunoglobulin G responses separated by cohorts to the mosquito salivary antigens Anopheles gambiae sporozoite-associated protein (AgSAP; A), Anopheles gambiae TRIO (AgTRIO; B), mosquito gamma interferon–inducible lysosomal thiol reductase (mosGILT; C), and sporozoite-associated mosquito saliva protein 1 (SAMSP1; D), with geometric means shown by bars, 95% confidence intervals shown by whiskers, and individual responses shown by dots. Cohorts are split by malaria transmission (Thiès is a low-transmission area with an entomological inoculation rate [EIR] <5 infectious bites per person per year, and Kédougou is an area of moderate malaria transmission with an EIR ∼250 infectious bites per person per year) and time relative to malaria infection (acute are samples from the time of malaria infection, recent are samples collected 2–4 weeks after malaria infection, transmission are samples collected from uninfected individuals during the malaria transmission season, and non-transmission are samples collected from uninfected individuals outside of the malaria transmission season). HCW is a cohort of healthcare workers from the United States who have not been exposed to malaria-infected mosquitoes. Heatmaps above each bar plot show significant differences between groups of linear mixed models of log-transformed MFI of post hoc pairwise comparisons adjusting P values with the Tukey method. X's indicate that comparisons were not performed.The HCW cohort had a relatively high reactivity for mosGILT and SAMSP1, resulting in no significant differences between HCWs and uninfected individuals in the transmission season in either Thiès or Kédougou (Figure 2C and 2D). For SAMSP1, only the Thiès recent infection cohort MFI was significantly higher than HCW MFI (P = .0182). For SG6, the results also did not differ between the HCW cohort and the cohorts in malaria-endemic areas (Figure 1A).Antibody Responses to All Proteins Did Not Differ Either by Transmission Season or IntensityNone of the antibody responses distinguished seasonality from uninfected people in Thiès (Figures 1A and 2). MFI also did not differ between those in low-transmission Thiès versus moderate-transmission Kédougou (ie, between acute infection, recent infection, and uninfected transmission season samples in Thiès and Kédougou) (Figure 2).Antibodies to AgSAP and AgTRIO Were Associated With Recent Infectious Mosquito ExposureWe next evaluated whether responses were associated with recent infectious mosquito bites using acute and recent infection. Immune reactivity to AgSAP and AgTRIO distinguished between cohorts with and without recent infectious mosquito exposure. For both AgSAP and AgTRIO in Thiès, people with acute or recent (2–4 weeks postdiagnosis) malaria infection had significantly higher reactivity than uninfected people in the transmission season (both P < .001; Figure 2A and 2B). However, in Kédougou, only those with recent infection had significantly higher AgSAP and AgTRIO reactivity than those uninfected from the transmission season (both P < .005); differences between those with acute infection compared to uninfected people in the transmission season in Kédougou were not significant.For SAMSP1, in Thiès, recent infection increased IgG reactivity compared to uninfected individuals in the transmission season (P = .0043), but other comparisons were not significant (Figure 2D). For mosGILT, no differences were significant (Figure 2C). For SG6, people with acute infection in Thiès had higher IgG reactivity than uninfected individuals in the transmission season in Kédougou (P = .028; Figure 1A).Longitudinally, Antibodies to AgSAP and AgTRIO Peaked at 2–4 Weeks Postinfection and Decreased by 3 Months After InfectionPeak AgSAP reactivity in the Thiès cohort was among individuals who had malaria infection 2 weeks prior (significantly higher than all timepoints other than week 4 and reinfection, P < .001) and 4 weeks prior (significantly higher reactivity than timepoints 3, 12, 18, and 24 months after infection, all P < .001; Figure 3A and Supplementary Table 3). Among the Kédougou cohort, reactivity 2 weeks and 4 weeks after infection were also significantly higher than at acute infection (P ≤ .01).Figure 3.Immunoglobulin G mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) shown longitudinally, by individual, from Thiès and Kédougou for each mosquito salivary antigen: Anopheles gambiae sporozoite-associated protein (AgSAP; A), Anopheles gambiae TRIO (AgTRIO; B), mosquito gamma interferon–inducible lysosomal thiol reductase (mosGILT; C), and sporozoite-associated mosquito saliva protein 1 (SAMSP1; D). Timepoints with infection are shown in red (day 0 and reinfection for Thiès, and day 0 for Kédougou), and timepoints without infection are shown in black. Malaria transmission seasons are shown in green. Blue line shows the geometric mean at each timepoint, and light blue shows the 95% confidence intervals for the geometric mean (calculated excluding reinfection timepoints for Thiès).Similar to AgSAP, AgTRIO antibody responses in the Thiès cohort peaked among individuals who had malaria infection 2 weeks prior (significantly higher reactivity than all timepoints other than week 4 and reinfection, P < .01) and 4 weeks prior (significantly higher reactivity than at 3 months [P = .03] and 12, 18, and 24 months after infection [all P < .0001]; Figure 3B). AgTRIO reactivity among the Kédougou cohort was also highest at 2 weeks and 4 weeks after infection but was not significantly higher than at acute infection (P = .08 compared to week 2, and P = .09 compared to week 4).For mosGILT, there were no significant antibody reactivity differences between timepoints in either cohort (Figure 3C). For SAMSP1 antibodies, in the Thiès cohort, reactivity among individuals who had malaria 2 weeks prior was significantly higher than reactivity at 3, 6, 12, 18, and 24 months after infection (all P < .05, Figure 3D). For SG6, people in the Thiès cohort with acute malaria infection and those with infection 2 weeks prior had significantly higher reactivity than people at 3, 12, and 18 months after infection (all P < .05; Figure 1B). No differences were significant between timepoints in the Kédougou cohort for SAMSP1 or SG6 reactivity (Figures 1B and 3D).Using Cutoffs for Seropositivity, AgSAP had a High Specificity and AgTRIO had a High SensitivityAgSAP did not demonstrate a bimodal distribution and as such, using the negative HCW cohort, the positive cutoff value for AgSAP was an MFI of 1645 (calculated from mean + 2 standard deviations of log-transformed results; Supplementary Figure 4A). Specificity was 97.4% among HCWs (75/77). Sensitivity of AgSAP was 18.9% (7/37) and 22.5% (16/71) among acutely infection individuals in Thiès and Kédougou, respectively. Sensitivity of AgSAP was 47.6% (30/63) and 44.0% (11/25) among individuals in Thiès and Kédougou, respectively, with infection 2–4 weeks prior.In contrast, AgTRIO MFI values exhibited a mildly bimodal distribution, and using a finite mixture model, the positive cutoff was set to an MFI of 500 (Supplementary Figure 4B). HCW MFI values for AgTRIO were too high to obtain a usable cutoff. With a cutoff of 500, specificity for HCWs was 51.9% (40/77). Sensitivity of AgTRIO was 83.8% (31/37) and 94.4% (67/71) among acutely infected individuals in Thiès and Kédougou, respectively. Sensitivity was 90.5% (57/63) and 100% (25/25) among recently infected individuals in Thiès and Kédougou, respectively. Seropositivity rates are shown in Figure 4 and described in the Supplementary Results.Figure 4.Seropositivity for each cohort for mosquito salivary antigens Anopheles gambiae sporozoite-associated protein (AgSAP) and Anopheles gambiae TRIO (AgTRIO). Cohorts are split by malaria transmission (Thiès is a low-transmission area with an entomological inoculation rate [EIR] <5 infectious bites per person per year, and Kédougou has a moderate malaria transmission with an EIR ∼250 infectious bites per person per year) and time relative to malaria infection (acute are samples from the time of malaria infection, recent are samples collected 2–4 weeks after infection, transmission are samples collected from uninfected individuals during the transmission season, and non-transmission are samples collected from uninfected individuals outside of the transmission season). HCW is a cohort of healthcare workers from the United States who are not expected to have exposure to malaria-infected mosquitoes. For AgSAP, cutoffs for positivity were calculated using values from the negative HCW cohort. Values were log-transformed for normality, and the mean + 2 standard deviations was calculated and then exponentiated to determine a cutoff for positivity. For AgTRIO, cutoffs for positivity were determined from a finite mixture model from a bimodal distribution .IgG Responses to MSAs as Measured by Sample Type and Testing Platform Were Moderately CorrelatedComparisons by sample type (plasma vs dried blood spot) and by testing platform (multiplex vs ELISA) both showed moderate correlation (Supplementary Figures 6 and 7; described in detail in the Supplementary Results).Homologous Proteins in Other Anopheles SpeciesOrthologous proteins of AgSAP, AgTRIO, mosGILT, SAMSP1, and SG6 are found in different mosquito species. The homology and percentage identity for these orthologs, particularly for other Anopheles species, are described in Supplementary Tables 4 and 5.DISCUSSIONWe determined that serological responses to MSAs can effectively indicate exposure to infectious mosquitoes, potentially serving as an alternative to EIR as a measure of P falciparum transmission intensity. Unlike EIR estimates, which are limited by sampling issues (eg, seasonal variation), precision (eg, variation in measuring HBR and contribution of indoor/outdoor biting), and accuracy (eg, spatial and temporal heterogeneity in vector density) , serological measurements are a more direct measure of the effect of mosquito bites on humans and may be less prone to such issues. Among the 4 MSAs, humoral responses to AgSAP and AgTRIO were the best indicators of recent infectious mosquito bites.Higher IgG Reactivity to AgSAP and AgTRIO Is Associated With Malaria EndemicityWe show here that reactivity to AgSAP is higher in a moderate-transmission area than in healthy controls from a nonendemic area (Figure 2A), consistent with a previous study . Similarly, AgTRIO responses were higher in both low- and moderate-transmission areas relative to a nonendemic area (Figure 2B). While a previous study found no significant difference , our study may have had greater power to detect this effect. Neither AgSAP nor AgTRIO could discriminate between populations in areas of different malaria endemicity (Figure 2A and 2B).Although mosGILT and SAMSP1 are directly associated with Plasmodium sporozoites during transmission  and individuals in malaria-endemic Senegal were previously found to have higher SAMSP1 IgG reactivity than individuals living in nonendemic France , serological responses to mosGILT and SAMSP1 did not show clear patterns in relation to infectious mosquito exposure. The high reactivity of mosGILT, SAMSP1, and SG6 for the negative HCW cohort limited our ability to distinguish between populations.In the Absence of Infection, AgSAP, AgTRIO, mosGILT, and SAMSP1 Are Not Biomarkers of General Mosquito Exposure or Malaria Transmission SeasonThe lack of differences between uninfected people in the transmission and nontransmission seasons for Thiès (comparison not available for Kédougou) and the lack of difference in cohorts in low- and moderate-transmission areas suggests that these MSAs are unable to determine seasonal differences in malaria exposure or intensity in the absence of infection. SG6 also did not show these differences, contrary to previous studies [7, 10–14, 18]. It is possible that SG6 differences would be observed in a high-transmission area rather than the low- and moderate-transmission areas tested here. SG6 reactivity was significantly higher in Kédougou in the transmission season than in Thiès outside of the transmission season, which could be due to higher exposure to mosquito bites due both to seasonal and regional differences.AgSAP and AgTRIO Are Promising Indicators of Recent or Infectious Mosquito ExposureAgSAP and AgTRIO both show similar trends in serological responses after exposure to an infectious mosquito. In a low-transmission area, where infectious mosquito bites are less common, IgG responses to both AgSAP and AgTRIO peak after infectious mosquito exposure (indicated by malaria infection) and decline by 3 months after infection. AgSAP  and AgTRIO  are both upregulated in infectious mosquitoes, and AgSAP and AgTRIO reactivity were highest among individuals with recent infection, suggesting that AgSAP and AgTRIO serological responses peak 2–4 weeks after clinical malaria, which is itself at least 7–10 days after an infectious bite . In both the low-transmission area of Thiès and the moderate-transmission area of Kédougou, AgSAP responses with recent infection were significantly higher than during acute infection (Figure 2A). AgTRIO responses were significantly higher during recent infection than acute infection in Thiès but not in Kédougou (Figure 2B). For both AgSAP and AgTRIO, responses decline after recent infection and are significantly lower 3 months after initial infection (Figure 3A and 3B), suggesting that the kinetics of AgSAP build a couple of weeks after infection and then decline relatively quickly.SAMSP1 IgG responses are higher in individuals in Thiès with acute and recent malaria infection relative to responses in uninfected people in and outside of the transmission season and to those in a non-malaria-endemic area (Figure 2D). SAMSP1 reactivity may also peak 2–4 weeks after infection and decrease by 3 months after infection, although differences were not observed in Kédougou.Seropositivity Could Show Differences Between PopulationsA benefit of AgSAP and AgTRIO responses may lie in their ability to discriminate among changes in populations, for example, before and after a community-based intervention. Bimodal distributions can be an effective way to determine cutoffs. The current distribution of AgTRIO does not strongly fit a bimodal distribution, which limits this method's efficacy, but this method could still be explored in a disease surveillance context where the inclusion of more samples could improve the fit of the distribution . Here, AgSAP had a relatively low sensitivity and a high specificity, while AgTRIO had high sensitivity and a low specificity. Both AgSAP and AgTRIO had higher sensitivity among recently infected than acutely infected individuals.As multiple P falciparum antigens have been used to estimate malaria prevalence , we investigated whether AgSAP and AgTRIO results together could increase sensitivity and specificity. Results between AgSAP and AgTRIO were highly correlated (Spearman ρ = 0.636), and their response kinetics were similar, indicating no substantial benefit in combining these antigens.Cohorts in ContextThis study tested samples from 2 different regions of Senegal: Thiès, a low-transmission area with an EIR <5 infectious bites per person per year [32–34], and Kédougou, a moderate-transmission area with an EIR of approximately 250 . The low malaria transmission in Thiès has been tracked over time , and in the longitudinal cohort tested here, only 4 of 70 individuals had malaria reinfections over 2 years of follow-up. Conversely, since malaria transmission is higher in Kédougou, we expect this cohort to have been exposed to infectious mosquitoes more frequently than the Thiès cohort. This could result in different MSA immune responses between these areas, particularly for antigens upregulated in Plasmodium-infected mosquitoes. Therefore, individuals from Kédougou may be more likely to get a “boosting” effect from exposure to infected mosquitoes.As such, longitudinal changes in responses from Thiès may demonstrate a more direct indicator of responses after exposure to Plasmodium-infected mosquito antigens. The longitudinal data from Thiès show clear peaks in AgSAP and AgTRIO responses 2–4 weeks after subjects had symptomatic malaria, and then tend to reduce during the subsequent 2 years of follow-up. Longitudinal data from moderate transmission Kédougou likewise show high AgSAP and AgTRIO reactivity up to 4 weeks after symptomatic malaria, but without longer follow-up, we cannot compare long-term kinetics of antibody responses in Kédougou to those in Thiès.LimitationsWe tested samples from a low- and moderate-transmission area of Senegal, but we cannot exclude the possibility that serological results may differ in an extremely high-transmission area. Although the kinetics of AgSAP and AgTRIO suggest that serological responses diminish within a couple of months, a person in a high-transmission area could be exposed to infectious mosquitoes more frequently. Our Kédougou cohorts aimed to model high transmission, but transmission in Kédougou is lower than transmission in intense, hyperendemic regions. A high-transmission area with more infectious mosquito exposure could cause serological responses to remain high, obscuring changes in malaria transmission. Additionally, we cannot distinguish between recent exposure to infectious mosquito bites that do or do not result in malaria infection. This could be evaluated, along with more exact timing of responses after infectious mosquito bites, through controlled human malaria infections.There are homologous proteins to the proteins tested here in other Anopheles species, so reactivity to certain proteins may result from exposure to similar proteins in other mosquitoes (Supplementary Tables 4 and 5). If so, the distribution of mosquito species in a region could affect serological results. Cross-reactivity across Anopheles species has yet to be empirically tested. Most P falciparum transmission in West Africa is driven by An. gambiae, An. arabiensis, An. coluzzii, An. melas, An. funestus, An. stephensi, and An. nili . In Senegal, An. gambiae is the predominant vector, though An. nili plays a relatively larger role in southeastern Senegal, including Kédougou .CONCLUSIONSThis is a promising first study investigating human reactivity to 4 novel MSAs in areas of low and moderate malaria transmission. These salivary antigens represent potential complimentary antigens to SG6, an MSA that is a marker of exposure to mosquito bites, and P falciparum antigens that are markers of malaria parasite exposure to different stages of the parasite life cycle, as antigens that uniquely represent potential markers of recent exposure to infectious mosquito bites. AgSAP and AgTRIO are promising markers of exposure to infectious mosquito bites in low- and moderate-transmission areas. Further studies could investigate their utility in highly endemic areas. The multiplex approach used here is a flexible method that allows for the possibility of adding additional markers, which could make tests of these antigens in high-transmission areas and more geographical regions more feasible. This approach could efficiently track population-level changes in P falciparum exposure, particularly in regions already using multiplex surveillance, and before and after vector control interventions.Supplementary Data Supplementary materials are available at The Journal of Infectious Diseases online (http://jid.oxfordjournals.org/). Supplementary materials consist of data provided by the author that are published to benefit the reader. The posted materials are not copyedited. The contents of all supplementary data are the sole responsibility of the authors. Questions or messages regarding errors should be addressed to the author.Supplementary Material