ConclusionsAlthough all plasma p-tau measurements enabled discrimination between clinical groups, p-tau217 assays showed the highest robustness, independently of the pan-tau detector antibody targeting N-terminal or mid-region, and independently of the platform used. Considering the observed method disagreement in measured absolute concentrations, we stress the need for development of certified reference material, harmonizing measurements across different platforms. DiscussionIn the present study we compared three p-tau181 and five p-tau217 plasma immunoassays measured in a cohort of 40 patients with AD-dem and 40 cognitively healthy controls. The assays were run on fully automated Lumipulse® or semi-automated HD-X™ instruments, enabling high throughput measurements, with a minimum hands-on time required. Independently of the platform used, all compared assays showed a satisfactory analytical sensitivity and precision, with average inter- and intra-assay variability of QC samples < 20%. Three of the plasma p-tau217 assays – mid-region Lumipulse Fujirebio, N-term Lumipulse ADx, and Simoa Janssen – showed inter- and intra-assay variability < 10%.Following the head-to-head analysis, we report a significant positive correlation between all the analyzed p-tau measurements, with the highest correlation observed for pairs of p-tau217 assays. Despite the strong correlations, method comparison analysis (Passing-Bablok regression, Bland-Altman plots) revealed presence of between-assay discrepancies, indicative of fixed and/or proportional bias and non-linear correlations for majority of comparisons. The best agreement was found in comparison of p-tau181 Simoa Quanterix and p-tau181 Lumipulse Fujirebio assays, where the relatively limited discrepancy corresponds to calibration curve ranges less distinct than those developed for other assays (Lumipulse Fujirebio 0–60 pg/mL, Simoa Quanterix 0–74.6 pg/mL). Following the observed differences, we derived Passing-Bablok regression formulas for translation of p-tau concentrations obtained by different assays. However, considering potential inaccuracy driven by batch-to-batch differences and the presence of non-linear correlations, the formulas should be externally validated and carefully interpreted, with consideration of the specific research context. Importantly, development of the certified reference material remains a key step toward standardization of the assays, including assays calibration and sensitivity, and thus reduction of the fixed and proportional bias .Regardless of the between-method discrepancies, we report good to excellent diagnostic performance of all assays. As measured by all eight assays, plasma p-tau181 and p-tau217 levels were significantly increased in AD-dem group when compared with cognitively healthy controls, with median concentration fold change values (AD-dem/Control) being higher for the p-tau217 assays than for the p-tau181 assays. This is in agreement with the previous studies where plasma p-tau217 showed the highest fold change when compared with other p-tau epitopes measured in AD continuum and control groups . Higher fold change between the disease and control state is indicative of a wide dynamic range and/or limited within-group biological variation . Among the five p-tau217 assays included in our analysis, the fold change value assessed for p-tau217 mid-region Lumipulse Fujirebio assay was visibly higher (6.74) than the fold changes determined for the remaining four p-tau217 assays (range 3.72–4.32), thus, indicating a particular robustness of this assay. In agreement, we found this assay to provide the highest nominal AUC in discrimination between Control and AD-dem groups (AUC = 0.956, 95% CI 0.902–1.000), enabling determination of a cut-off with both very high sensitivity (95%) and specificity (95%); however, this AUC value was not significantly different than AUC values calculated for other p-tau217 assays. Among the Simoa® assays, the highest fold change was shown by p-tau217 Simoa Janssen assay (4.32), which yielded nominal AUC value (0.942 95% CI 0.883–1.000), with Youden’s cut-off providing 98% sensitivity and 85% specificity. Interestingly, plasma p-tau217 Simoa Janssen is the assay commercially offered as p-tau217+, where “+” refers to the capture antibody (PT3) targeting, next to T217, also tau phosphorylation at T212 . While this lack of antibody specificity for the main targeted site has been recently proposed to have a detrimental effect on diagnostic performance , this has not been observed in our cohort, consistent with previous reports . In light of a recent evidence for AD biomarker potential of p-tau212, it might be that the multi-epitope antibody binding contributes to the enhanced diagnostic accuracy of the assay . Overall, an excellent diagnostic accuracy was observed for all analyzed p-tau217 assays, providing AUC range of 0.916–0.956, with no statistically significant differences between AUC values. The performance of p-tau181 assays was lower though still high (AUC range 0.829–0.909, fold change range 1.81–2.94), with the significant difference observed between AUC of p-tau181 Simoa Quanterix assay (0.829, 95% CI 0.736–0.922) and AUC values obtained for each of the p-tau217 assays. These results are consistent with a number of recent studies employing large, well-characterized cohorts of patients across all the AD continuum, including preclinical AD, where excellent diagnostic performance has been reported for plasma p-tau217 assays included in the present comparison (p-tau217 mid-region Lumipulse Fujirebio, p-tau217 Simoa Janssen, p-tau217 Simoa Alzpath) . Studies assessing diagnostic performance of plasma p-tau181 range from those reporting on moderate  to very good accuracy  of this biomarker in discrimination of AD pathology. Interestingly, plasma p-tau181 Simoa Quanterix and plasma p-tau181 Simoa ADx are the assays which performance was also assessed in our previous work, where higher diagnostic accuracy has been observed compared with a present report . However, despite the similar study design applied in both studies, the cohorts were composed of different individuals, possibly driving the observed difference . Nevertheless, while the satisfactory diagnostic performance of plasma p-tau181 is well established at the advanced disease stages, in recent studies assessing both plasma p-tau181 and p-tau217 levels in the same cohort and on the same instrument (Simoa® HD-X™ , Lumipulse® G600 ), p-tau217 measurements unanimously showed higher robustness and superior performance in discrimination of early disease stages .Interestingly, it has been recently proposed, that the length of targeted tau fragments may impact biomarker performance in body fluids, especially at the early stages of AD continuum . This has been shown for CSF and plasma total tau  and CSF p-tau assays , where the assays targeting minimal N-terminal sequence provided improved diagnostic accuracy compared with the assays targeting mid-region fragments . In the current study, for both plasma p-tau181 and p-tau217 measurements, we included the assays employing detector antibody against tau N-terminus or mid-region (Table 2). Such design allowed us to evaluate whether the diagnostic performance of assays targeting the same tau phosphorylation site by the same antibody, is influenced by length of detected tau fragments. Plasma p-tau181 Simoa Quanterix and p-tau181 Lumipulse Fujirebio assays shared the same anti-p-tau181 capture antibody but employed distinct detectors: for p-tau181 Simoa Quanterix, antibody against protein N-terminus was used while for p-tau181 Lumipulse Fujirebio, the detector was anti-mid-region tau antibody (Table 2). P-tau217 mid-region Lumipulse Fujirebio assay and p-tau217 N-term Lumipulse ADx assays shared the same platform (Lumipulse®) and the same capture antibody against p-tau217 but employed two different detector antibodies targeting tau N-terminus (p-tau217 N-term Lumipulse ADx) or mid-region (p-tau217 mid-region Lumipulse Fujirebio) (Table 2). In our analysis, no significant difference has been observed in diagnostic accuracy provided by p-tau assays targeting tau N-terminus compared with those targeting tau mid-region. This observation held true for both p-tau181 and p-tau217 assays. Thus, we conclude that, in this studied cohort, detection of post-translational modifications had the strongest impact on the diagnostic performance, with a limited relevance of the length of detected tau fragments. At the same time, in comparison of N-terminal vs. mid-region plasma p-tau181 assays, potential influence of two different platforms used should be considered.LimitationsThe main limitations of our study are related to the lack of validation cohort and to characteristics of the Control group, as no amyloid PET or amyloid CSF status of these participants is known. This has been mitigated by the assessment of plasma Aβ42/40, shown to be concordant with CSF Aβ42/40 status with 82% accuracy, as reported in our previous work . Additionally, as all the measurements were made in the same cohort, potential inclusion of individuals with positive amyloid status in Control group is expected to not impact the comparative analyses. As the Control group participants were healthy volunteers and did not undergo a lumbar puncture, the comparison of biomarker levels in CSF and plasma is not possible. Moreover, due to the limited samples size and lack of preclinical AD or mild cognitive impairment due to AD groups, this study limits clinical interpretation of the results and does not allow to define diagnostic accuracy of the assays in early stages of AD continuum. Further, lack of neuropsychological assessment of Control group does not allow for between-group comparison of the cognitive performance. ConclusionsOur results point to good analytical performance of all eight compared plasma p-tau immunoassays, independently of the detected phosphorylation site, tau fragment, and the platform used. While each of the plasma p-tau181 and p-tau217 immunoassays enabled an effective discrimination between the patients with AD-dem and cognitively unimpaired controls, we report, in agreement with literature, the highest accuracy observed for p-tau217 assays. In conclusion, we propose that the laboratories equipped with either of the two platforms can benefit from the availability of different p-tau assays, enabling highly accurate detection of AD pathology. At the same time, full standardization of the assays remains an important step on the way toward their clinical implementation.