IntroductionChronic inflammation is a major risk factor for coronary artery disease (CAD). Currently, the inflammatory cardiovascular risk is assessed via C-reactive protein (CRP) levels measured using a high-sensitivity assay (hsCRP). Monomeric CRP (mCRP) is a locally produced form of CRP that has emerged as a potential biomarker of inflammation. 1IntroductionChronic inflammation is a major risk factor for coronary artery disease (CAD) (1). C-reactive protein (CRP) is an acute-phase protein that is widely used as a reliable biomarker of inflammation (2). A level of CRP that is 2.0 mg/L or higher, as measured using a high-sensitivity assay (hsCRP), indicates the residual inflammatory cardiovascular risk (2).CRP is produced by hepatocytes in a form of the pentameric disc (pCRP) that consists of five subunits bound by disulfide bonds (3). Each subunit on one side of this disc presents binding sites for lysophosphocholine and calcium ions, as well as cholesterol. The opposite side of the pCRP disc presents binding sites for C1q complement and Fc gamma receptors (4). As a component of the innate immune system, pCRP functions as a pattern recognition molecule and regulates host defense responses (3). It has been suggested that pCRP exerts weak anti- and proinflammatory actions (5).The profile of the biological actions of CRP dramatically changes when pCRP binds to lysophosphocholine on the membranes of damaged cells and their microparticles (3, 6). There, the disulfide bonds between pCRP subunits undergo reduction. This results in the exposure of a C-terminal neoepitope (a.a. 199–206) that possesses antigenicity differing from that of the intact pCRP disk. The initial conformational change is the formation of pCRP*, which retains overall pentameric symmetry, while expressing the neoepitope. Braig et al. demonstrated that pCRP* is a major tissue-bound form of CRP, which is able to activate the complement system (7). Further conformational rearrangement leads to the complete dissociation of the pCRP disc into separate monomeric subunits (mCRP). mCRP exerts potent proinflammatory actions (3, 4), can induce endothelial activation (8) and can promote the recruitment of leukocytes (9), T-lymphocyte extravasation (10) and thrombus growth (11–13). In vivo evidence suggests that mCRP can stimulate the infiltration of monocytes into myocardial (6, 14) and renal tissues (15) after ischemia/reperfusion injury. The biologic actions of mCRP are discussed in more detail elsewhere (3, 4, 16).Conventional hsCRP assays primarily detect pCRP in blood plasma or serum. The measurement of mCRP levels requires aptamers or antibodies that recognize the neoepitope of the monomeric subunits and do not recognize pCRP. In recent years, the first reports measuring the levels of mCRP in humans have been published (17). This study aimed to investigate whether mCRP levels are associated with premature CAD.