ConclusionThese findings indicate ECM remodelling as a very early phenomenon of SSc occurring in parallel with microvascular and autoimmune changes. Biomarkers of type III and IV collagens distinguished between veSSc patients and HC, indicating them as potential biomarkers for the detection of veSSc. DiscussionThe results from this study indicate ECM remodelling as a very early phenomenon of SSc, preceeding clinical skin fibrosis and likely occurring in parallel with microvascular and autoimmune/inflammatory changes. Our data show that biomarkers of ECM turnover are already significantly elevated in the very early stages of the disease when no fibrosis is clinically detectable and the disease is clinically dominated by Raynaud’s phenomenon, microvascular changes on nailfold capillaroscopy and autoimmune features such as autoantibodies.It is remarkable that in particular ECM degradation markers were differentiating controls from veSSc patients. This could indicate that fibrosis is not yet clinically apparent in these patients because the increased synthesis of ECM by activated fibroblasts is successfully counterbalanced by an increase in ECM degradation. Indeed, ECM synthesis markers such as PRO-C3 were elevated in veSSc patients in our study but not to the same extent as degradation markers. This hypothesis needs to be tested by tissue studies. While circulating ECM epitopes might be good biomarkers for the disease and potentially useful to monitor its progression,17 they do not necessarily reflect the detailed molecular changes occurring in the tissues.Also, different cell types might contribute to the generation of circulating ECM epitopes. For example, type III collagen, which is most abundant in soft connective tissue and regulates the early phases of wound healing, is produced by interstitial fibroblasts. Dysregulation of type IV collagen turnover, which is a biomarker of vascular and basement membrane remodelling, may also be connected to the microvasculopathy through disruption of the endothelium.The excellent discriminatory capacity of the ECM epitopes (eg, AUC 0.97% for PRO-C4/C4M) differentiating veSSc patients from HCs raises the question, of whether they could be included in diagnostic algorithms. While the current results are promising and provide a strong signal, this has to be tested in further prospective studies. These studies need to include larger patient numbers and additional controls relevant to the differential diagnosis of veSSc. In addition, the relative weight and additive value to other established clinical markers need to be assessed.Our study has several strengths and limitations. It is to our knowledge the first study assessing ECM remodelling in patients with veSSc without clinically detectable fibrosis and it is potentially changing current paradigms. Limitations include the moderate sample size. However, given the overall limited data available for veSSc, the strong and clear differences observed and the consistency with our previous findings in established SSc,9 we consider the results to bring valuable information on the role of ECM neoepitopes in the incipient stages of the disease. We could not detect significant findings in the predictive analysis in our study. However, this could be explained by the low frequency of progression in our veSSc cohort, in which patients progressing to definite SSc did not develop major organ fibrosis. Assumptions on the mechanistic associations of the identified dysregulated circulatory collagen turnover markers are beyond the scope of this study and need to be addressed by further analyses.In conclusion, this study shows for the first time data supporting the dysregulation of ECM in patients with veSSc. It might have implications for the diagnostic workup of patients with veSSc and for therapeutic considerations. Further studies analysing ECM remodelling and its relation to vascular and immunological changes in different cohorts of patients with veSSc, as well as ‘relevant’ controls with primary Raynaud’s, are needed, in order to confirm and further analyse the complex interplay between these processes in incipient disease stages. If the hypothesis raised by our current study is confirmed, this could indicate a paradigm change in the understanding and approach to veSSc.