MethodsThe concentrations of neurofilament light chain (NfL) and glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) were determined in plasma using single-molecule array (SIMOA). The size and concentration of tetraspanin-presenting EVs were evaluated in plasma samples with a single-particle interferometric resonance imaging sensor (SP-IRIS). Tetraspanin-independent analyses were performed by nanoparticle-tracking analysis (NTA) after EV isolation by size exclusion (SmartSEC) and cryo-electron microscopy observations. EV epitopes were analyzed by extended multiplex analysis using flow cytometry. MethodsEthics, Participants, and Plasma CollectionA total of 96 participants were included in this study. Patients diagnosed with relapsing-remitting MS (RRMS) (n = 52), AQP4-positive NMOSD (n = 19), and MOG-positive MOGAD (n = 10) and age-matched and sex-matched healthy controls ([HCs], n = 15) from the Eginition University Hospital were included in this study. The study was approved by the ethical committee of the Eginition University Hospital (#501/30.7.2019). All patients signed an informed consent form for blood sample use for research purposes. Blood was collected into EDTA tubes and centrifuged within 1–5 hours after blood draw, at 3,100 × g, for 7 minutes at room temperature (RT). Plasma was then aliquoted and stored at −80°C until use.Overview of the Workflow for Plasma AnalysesCirculating NfL and GFAP were assayed in plasma samples using single-molecule array (SIMOA) (Figure 1A). We then used orthogonal methods to analyze plasma EVs, in accordance with current recommendations (MISEV2023), and evaluated EV characteristics with different methods. We assessed EV size, density, and their subcategories based on tetraspanin expression with a single-particle interferometric resonance imaging sensor (SP-IRIS) using the novel ExoView R100 system (Unchained Labs, Pleasanton, CA) (Figure 1B). EVs isolated with a size-exclusion chromatography-based technique were characterized by cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM), Western blotting, and nanoparticle-tracking analysis (NTA) (Figure 1C). The multiplex antibody bead–based flow cytometry assay allowed simultaneous analysis of 37 cell-specific EV surface epitopes using the MACSPlex EV kit (Miltenyi Biotec, Bergisch Gladbach, Germany) (Figure 1C).Figure 1Schematic Illustration of Plasma Analyses(A) Ultrasensitive detection of neurofilament light chain (NfL) and glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) by single-molecule array (SIMOA) in plasma samples. (B) EVs were analyzed using the single-particle interferometric resonance imaging sensor (SP-IRIS, ExoView, Unchained Labs) after immunocapture with CD9, CD81, and CD63 antibodies directly in plasma. (C) EV isolation with size-exclusion chromatography (SmartSEC, System Biosciences) followed by the characterization of isolated EVs by Western blotting (WB), nanoparticle-tracking analysis (NTA), and cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM). Extended EV-specific marker analysis by bead-based flow cytometry (MACSPlex EV kit, Miltenyi) after size-exclusion chromatography-based EV isolation. The levels of 37 EV surface markers plus 2 isotype controls (MIgG, human IgG1 isotype control antibody [REA293]) were simultaneously monitored. Each type of EV capture bead was labeled with 1 of the 39 antibodies. Bound EVs were detected with a cocktail of APC-labeled CD9, CD81, and CD63 antibodies. Illustrations created in BioRender Falk, V. (2025) BioRender.com/uqfyfpg and Adobe Photoshop (v. 2024). EV = extracellular vesicle.Ultrasensitive Detection of NfL and GFAP With SIMOANfL and GFAP were measured in plasma in duplicates with a SIMOA, using the Neurology 2-plex B assay (Quanterix, Billerica, MA). Because the blood levels of NfL and GFAP are influenced by age and sex,4 these factors were taken into consideration by calculating adjusted z-scores.4,5 NfL z-scores were adjusted for age, based on a large reference cohort,5 whereas preliminary GFAP z-scores were adjusted for age and sex based on a reference database of 4,943 samples from healthy individuals.4Single-Particle Interferometric Resonance Imaging Sensor for EV CharacterizationSingle-particle interferometric resonance imaging sensor (SP-IRIS) with ExoView (Unchained Labs, Pleasanton, CA) enables size and density measurement of EVs exhibiting membrane-bound tetraspanins CD9, CD63, and CD81 in crude plasma, without previous EV isolation. Plasma samples were thawed at RT and centrifuged at 5,000 × g for 20 minutes. Samples were diluted 1:50 in ExoView incubation solution II, to obtain an optimal number of around 3,000 counts per spot, and 50 µL was applied to prescanned chips overnight at RT. EVs were captured by anti-CD9, anti-CD63, and anti-CD81 antibodies as well as an isotype control (anti-MIgG). Vesicle surface immunofluorescence was performed according to the manufacturer's protocol, using antibodies against CD9, CD63, and CD81 provided by the manufacturer. Incubated chips were washed with the CW100 Chip Washer. Antibodies were diluted 1:500 in the provided blocking solution and incubated on the chips for 1 hour. Chips were then washed and scanned using the ExoView® Automated Imager. Results were analyzed with the ExoView Analyzer. Cutoffs were set to obtain the average count of <50 counts for CD63 and CD81 (red and green channel), with an average total detected of 5%, and an average count of <100 counts for CD9 (blue channel) with an average total detected of 1%. Sizes were measured by interferometric microscopy (IM) on every EV captured using the tetraspanins. Captured EVs giving off a fluorescent signal were counted for calculation of particle concentration, and the fluorescence intensity was measured per particle. Size distribution data were preprocessed in Python 3.9.7 using the numpy (version 1.21.5) and pandas (version 1.4.4) packages.Size-Exclusion Chromatography-Based EV IsolationPlasma samples were thawed at RT, and EVs were isolated through size-exclusion chromatography using the SmartSEC kit (System Biosciences, Palo Alto, CA) according to the manufacturer's protocol. In brief, plasma samples were centrifuged twice to eliminate larger vesicles, and 250 µL of plasma was added onto the washed column. To ensure proper elution, 250 µL of 0.1-µm filtered phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) was added to the column and it was incubated for 30 minutes while rolling. Columns were centrifuged at 500 × g for 30 seconds to elute EVs. Protease and phosphatase inhibitors were immediately added to the EV elution. Intact EVs were stored at 4°C for storage up to 1 week, or at −20°C for longer storage. For Western blotting, EVs were directly lysed in 0.5% CHAPS (PanReac AppliChem, Darmstadt, Germany) and stored at −20°C until use.Western BlottingWestern blotting was used to detect a common EV marker for characterization. Protein concentration of EV solutions was determined with a detergent compatible protein assay (BioRad, Hercules, CA) of lysed EVs. 10 µg of EVs was loaded onto 4%–12% Bis-Tris NuPAGE (Invitrogen, Waltham, MA) gels and run at 120 V for 80 minutes. Resolved proteins were transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane in a transfer system at 400 mA for approximately 70 minutes. Membranes were then washed with tris-buffered saline 0.2% Tween (TBS-T) 3 times for 10 minutes before blocking in 5% bovine serum albumin in TBS-T for 1 hour at RT. Thereafter, membranes were incubated with a primary antibody against Alix (1:500, NBP1-90201, Novus Biologicals, Centennial, CO) in a rolling shaker overnight at 4°C. Because tetraspanins were measured with both SP-IRIS and flow cytometry, Alix, an intravesicular marker, was used for Western blotting. Membranes were then washed and incubated with a secondary antibody conjugated with streptavidin-HRP for 1 hour at RT before detection with WesternSure Chemiluminescent Substrate (LI-COR, Lincoln, NE) on a C-DiGit Blot Scanner (LI-COR).Cryo-EMFor cryo-EM, 4 µL of isolated EVs was applied to a glow-discharged Lacey grid (30 seconds 10 mA Baltzers CTA 010). Vitrification was performed using a FEI Vitrobot Mark IV. The samples were applied to the grids at 4°C for 10–30 seconds at 100% humidity followed by 4 seconds of blotting. Vitrified grids were stored in liquid nitrogen before acquisition. Imaging was performed on a FEI Tecnai F20 equipped with a Falcon III camera with a total dose not exceeding 60 e−/Å2.NTAFresh EVs were examined by NTA. The concentration and size of EVs were determined using the NanoSight NS300 and the NanoSight 3.2 software programs (Malvern Panalytical, Malvern, United Kingdom). EVs were diluted 1:100–300, to reach a concentration of 10–100 particles per frame, in 0.1- µm filtered PBS. The camera level was set to 12, and a 488-nm laser was used. Each sample went through 5 repeated measures of 1 minute.Multiplex Analysis of EV Epitopes by Flow CytometryIsolated EVs were subjected to flow cytometry using the MACSPlex EV Kit IO (Miltenyi Biotec, Bergisch Gladbach, Germany), enabling the detection of 39 EV surface immune cell–related epitopes (including 2 isotype controls). The kit consists of a cocktail of 39 different beads, each coated with antibodies specific to EV epitopes. The bead populations can be distinguished by the different fluorescent intensities of the fluorophores phycoerythrin (PE) and fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC). EVs bound to these antibody-coated beads were detected with an additional cocktail comprising allophycocyanin (APC)-labeled anti-CD9, anti-CD63, and anti-CD81, forming a sandwich complex. Positive signals indicate the presence of the respective surface epitope, colocalized by the typical EV tetraspanins. Detection of EV surface markers was performed in accordance with the manufacturer's protocol. In these experiments, 20 µg of EVs was incubated with the beads overnight at RT in an orbital shaker (450 rpm). Subsequently, samples were centrifuged at 3,000 × g for 5 minutes, and the supernatant was carefully removed. A cocktail of APC-labeled anti-CD9, anti-CD63, and anti-CD81 antibodies (0.5-µg antibody/reaction) was mixed with the pellet, and it was incubated for 1 hour at RT under agitation (450 rpm). Furthermore, samples were washed 2 times with the MACSPlex Buffer before transfer to 5-mL round bottom tubes. Captured EVs were measured with the BD LSRFortessa (BD Biosciences, Franklin Lakes, NJ). Results were analyzed in FlowJo (v. 10.10.0) to obtain median signal intensities for all EV surface markers. Semiquantitative comparisons were allowed by subtracting the median signal intensities of the blank sample (buffer only) from the median signal intensity measured in each sample. Then, the mean of the measured median APC signal intensities of the bead populations coated with CD9, CD63, and CD81 antibodies was used as a normalizing factor for the rest of the markers.Statistical AnalysisRaw data were assembled in Microsoft Excel 365. Statistical analyses were performed in GraphPad Prism 9. Normally distributed data were analyzed with 1-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) and Pearson correlation while the Kruskal-Wallis test and Spearman correlation were applied for non-normally distributed data. For disease comparisons, 1-way ANOVA tests were followed by the Tukey post hoc test, and a p value < 0.05 was considered as significant. For multiple comparisons of 39 EV markers by flow cytometry, a p value < 0.001 was considered as significant, using Bonferroni correction for multiple testing.Data AvailabilityAnonymized patient data not published within this article will be made available by request from any qualified investigator. Ethics, Participants, and Plasma CollectionA total of 96 participants were included in this study. Patients diagnosed with relapsing-remitting MS (RRMS) (n = 52), AQP4-positive NMOSD (n = 19), and MOG-positive MOGAD (n = 10) and age-matched and sex-matched healthy controls ([HCs], n = 15) from the Eginition University Hospital were included in this study. The study was approved by the ethical committee of the Eginition University Hospital (#501/30.7.2019). All patients signed an informed consent form for blood sample use for research purposes. Blood was collected into EDTA tubes and centrifuged within 1–5 hours after blood draw, at 3,100 × g, for 7 minutes at room temperature (RT). Plasma was then aliquoted and stored at −80°C until use. Multiplex Analysis of EV Epitopes by Flow CytometryIsolated EVs were subjected to flow cytometry using the MACSPlex EV Kit IO (Miltenyi Biotec, Bergisch Gladbach, Germany), enabling the detection of 39 EV surface immune cell–related epitopes (including 2 isotype controls). The kit consists of a cocktail of 39 different beads, each coated with antibodies specific to EV epitopes. The bead populations can be distinguished by the different fluorescent intensities of the fluorophores phycoerythrin (PE) and fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC). EVs bound to these antibody-coated beads were detected with an additional cocktail comprising allophycocyanin (APC)-labeled anti-CD9, anti-CD63, and anti-CD81, forming a sandwich complex. Positive signals indicate the presence of the respective surface epitope, colocalized by the typical EV tetraspanins. Detection of EV surface markers was performed in accordance with the manufacturer's protocol. In these experiments, 20 µg of EVs was incubated with the beads overnight at RT in an orbital shaker (450 rpm). Subsequently, samples were centrifuged at 3,000 × g for 5 minutes, and the supernatant was carefully removed. A cocktail of APC-labeled anti-CD9, anti-CD63, and anti-CD81 antibodies (0.5-µg antibody/reaction) was mixed with the pellet, and it was incubated for 1 hour at RT under agitation (450 rpm). Furthermore, samples were washed 2 times with the MACSPlex Buffer before transfer to 5-mL round bottom tubes. Captured EVs were measured with the BD LSRFortessa (BD Biosciences, Franklin Lakes, NJ). Results were analyzed in FlowJo (v. 10.10.0) to obtain median signal intensities for all EV surface markers. Semiquantitative comparisons were allowed by subtracting the median signal intensities of the blank sample (buffer only) from the median signal intensity measured in each sample. Then, the mean of the measured median APC signal intensities of the bead populations coated with CD9, CD63, and CD81 antibodies was used as a normalizing factor for the rest of the markers. Statistical AnalysisRaw data were assembled in Microsoft Excel 365. Statistical analyses were performed in GraphPad Prism 9. Normally distributed data were analyzed with 1-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) and Pearson correlation while the Kruskal-Wallis test and Spearman correlation were applied for non-normally distributed data. For disease comparisons, 1-way ANOVA tests were followed by the Tukey post hoc test, and a p value < 0.05 was considered as significant. For multiple comparisons of 39 EV markers by flow cytometry, a p value < 0.001 was considered as significant, using Bonferroni correction for multiple testing. Multiplex Analysis of EV Epitopes by Flow CytometrySurface markers were studied on isolated EVs by flow cytometry with the MACSPlex EV kit (Miltenyi Biotec, Figure 1C). EV subpopulations were isolated with capture beads coated with antibodies directed against 37 distinct EV epitopes (Figure 5A). The capture beads were discriminated according to PE and FITC fluorescence intensities (Figure 5B), and captured EVs were detected by the APC signal from the CD9, CD81, and CD63 antibodies. The APC intensity of each bead population was quantified. To different extents, the levels of CD29, CD31, CD40, CD44, and CD69, which are T-cell–associated and leukocyte-associated markers, significantly changed in patients with RRMS along with the time elapsed since the last relapse and NfL or GFAP z-scores (Figure 5C). CD29, CD31, and CD69 were positively associated with the time elapsed since the last relapse. A negative correlation was established between the levels of CD31, CD40, CD44, CD49c, and CD69 and plasma NfL in the RRMS sample in contrast to NMOSD, MOGAD, and HC samples, suggesting that increased expression of specific EV markers may be associated with low disease activity in RRMS (Figure 5C). A similar relationship was observed between CD44 and CD69 and plasma GFAP (Figure 5C). Of note, the levels of EV markers did not significantly differ between the whole groups (eFigure 4). In addition, no significant differences were observed between patients with RRMS treated with NTZ (n = 33) and those receiving dimethylfumarate/glatiramer acetate (n = 12) or left untreated (NT, n = 7) (eFigure 5), suggesting that EV molecular composition changes are not attributable to treatment. In conclusion, our multiplex data suggest that the increase in a subset of EV markers may specifically be associated with low disease activity in RRMS.