Background and ObjectivesMultiple sclerosis (MS) can start as relapsing or progressive. While their clinical features and treatment responses are distinct, it has remained uncertain whether their pathomechanisms differ. A notable age-related effect on MS phenotype and response to immunotherapies is well acknowledged, but the underlying pathophysiologic reasons are yet to be fully elucidated. We aimed to identify disease-specific and age-related proteomic signatures using a comprehensive targeted proteomic analysis. IntroductionMultiple sclerosis (MS) is the leading cause of chronic neurologic disability in young adults.1 Over the past decade, there has been a substantial rise in MS prevalence globally, culminating in a total of 2.8 million individuals affected by MS worldwide.2 In 90% of individuals with MS, MS sets on with a relapsing-remitting course (RRMS), and in 10% with a primary progressive course (PPMS).3 The prevalence of PPMS among newly diagnosed individuals increases with age.4 Aging and disease duration are also major determinants for secondary progression in RRMS. Depending on age, up to 50%–60% of individuals with RRMS transition into a phase of clinically apparent secondary disease progression in the fifth decade.5,6 The distinction between a relapsing course and a progressive course is decisive for implementing disease-modifying therapies.Regarding pathophysiology, the early phase of RRMS is characterized by a dominant autoreactive adaptive immune response originating from the peripheral immune system.7 In line with this, young individuals with MS respond favorably to available immunomodulatory drugs that target peripheral T and B lymphocytes or prevent their CNS infiltration.8The pathophysiology underlying PPMS remains elusive. Compartmentalized neuroinflammation or primary neurodegeneration is being discussed as a driver of gradual worsening.9,10 Both pathophysiologic models align with low efficacy of immunotherapies in progressive MS targeting adaptive immune responses in the periphery.8Comprehensive biological phenotyping is essential to better understand the pathophysiologic processes underlying MS and for delineating age-associated and disease course–specific mechanisms. Owing to the proximity of CSF to the CNS compartment, CSF is more likely to reflect pathologic processes in MS and more suitable for such analyses compared with serum or plasma. The influence of aging on the MS CSF proteome has not yet been comprehensively investigated, and most studies that have attempted to identify disease-specific marker proteins have not used proper age-matched cohorts.In this study, we used a large-scale targeted proteomic approach to analyze age-related and disease course–specific CSF protein signatures in MS. In our discovery cohort, we compared the CSF profiles of individuals with MS with those of age-matched neurologic controls (NC) and individuals with Lyme neuroborreliosis (LNB), aiming to identify MS-specific protein signatures. To discern unique protein signatures associated with different MS disease courses, we compared the protein profiles of individuals with RRMS and age-matched PPMS. This was followed by subsequent analyses of protein abundance across various age groups to uncover age-dependent protein signatures. MS-associated proteins were then validated in an independent cohort and further compared with paired serum proteomic profiles. Proteomic results were moreover integrated with phenotyping of CSF cells by flow cytometry.