LC‐MS/MS AnalysisSerum samples were first depleted of high‐abundance proteins. To denature, reduce, and alkylate low‐abundance proteins, the resulting protein fraction was incubated with reaction buffer (1% SDC/100 mm Tris‐HCl, pH 8.5/10 mm Tris(2‐carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride/40 mm 2‐chloroacetamide) at 95 °C for 10 min. The mixture was then diluted with an equal volume of ultrapure water. Protein digestion was carried out by incubating the sample with trypsin at a 1:50 mass ratio (enzyme to protein) at 37 °C overnight. The reaction was quenched by adding trifluoroacetic acid, followed by centrifugation at 16000× g to remove the supernatant. Peptides were then desalted using an in‐house‐made styrene‐divinylbenzene column.LC‐MS/MS analysis was performed using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo) coupled to a hybrid trapped ion mobility‐quadrupole time‐of‐flight mass spectrometer (timsTOF Pro, Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) via a CaptiveSpray ion source. Digested proteome mixtures were first trapped on a C18 HPLC column (75 µm × 2 cm, 3 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size, Thermo) and subsequently separated using a reversed‐phase C18 HPLC column (75 µm × 25 cm, 1.6 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size, IonOpticks) with an autosampler. A binary gradient was established using mobile phase A (0.1% v/v formic acid) and mobile phase B (0.1% v/v formic acid, 99.9% v/v acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 300 nL min−1.The mass spectrometer was operated in parallel accumulation‐serial fragmentation (PASEF) mode with a capillary voltage of 1500 V. MS1 and MS2 scans were acquired over an m/z range of 100–1700. The ion mobility 1/K₀ range was set from 0.75 to 1.4 V s cm−2. Both the accumulation and ramp times were set to 100 ms. The total acquisition cycle of 1.16 s consisted of one MS1 full scan and ten MS2 scans. Singly charged precursor ions were excluded. Precursors for MS/MS were selected at an intensity threshold of 1000 arbitrary units (a.u.) and re‐sequenced until reaching a target intensity of 10000 a.u., with a dynamic exclusion window of 40 s. The quadrupole isolation window was set to 2.0 Da for m/z 700 and 3.0 Da for m/z 800. Collision energy was linearly reduced from 59 eV at 1/K₀ = 1.6 V s cm−2 to 20 eV at 1/K₀ = 0.6 V s cm−2 based on ion mobility settings.Acquired spectra were searched against the human proteome Uniprot database (released June 19, 2023, with 20423 entries) using MaxQuant software (V2.0.1). Oxidation of methionine and N‐terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications, while carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. Trypsin was specified as the proteolytic enzyme. The initial precursor mass tolerances were set to 20 ppm in the first search and 4.5 ppm in the main search, with a fragment mass tolerance of 20 ppm. The false discovery rate was set to 1% at both the peptide spectral match and protein levels, and peptide identification was enabled for matching between runs. Bioinformatics AnalysisDEP analysis was performed to identify proteins with altered expression between LUAD samples with and without MPP patterns. To investigate the potential roles of these DEPs in the pathogenesis of LUAD with MPP patterns, enrichment analyses, including GO annotation and KEGG pathway analysis, were conducted. Additionally, a protein interaction network was constructed using the STRING database to explore the relationships among DEPs. Machine Learning AnalysisRandom Forest, Logistic Regression, Naive Bayes, Decision Tree, Hierarchical Clustering, k‐Means, Louvain Clustering, and DBSCAN algorithms were applied using Orange Data Mining (Version 3.34) with the following parameter settings: A) Random Forest: the minimum size of split subsets was set to 4; B) Logistic Regression: L2 regularization was used, with a regularization strength of 3; C) Naive Bayes: applied with default automatic settings; D) Decision Tree: a binary tree was built with a minimum of 5 instances in leaves, splitting was stopped when subsets contained fewer than 5 instances, the maximum tree depth was set to 50, and tree growth stopped when majority purity reached 95%; E) Hierarchical Clustering: performed using Ward linkage to measure distances between clusters, with the top two clusters selected for analysis; F) k‐Means: column normalization was applied, and the number of clusters was fixed at 2. Random initialization was used for cluster centroids, with a maximum of 300 iterations and 10 restarts; G) Louvain Clustering: data normalization was performed, and principal component analysis was applied to reduce noise. The Manhattan distance metric and 21 nearest neighbors were used to construct the graph, with the resolution parameter set at 0.9; H) DBSCAN: a core point was defined as having at least one neighbor within a maximum distance (epsilon) of 1.74. The Euclidean distance metric was used, and data were standardized column‐wise.All learning results were visualized using confusion matrices, ROC curves, and 2D projections to enable intuitive interpretation of class separations and model performance. Statistical AnalysisAll SERS spectra were background‐corrected using LabSpec 6 software. The area proportion of signal‐active pixels was quantified using ImageJ, normalized to the total mapping area, and used to calculate the SERS signature. Data are presented as mean ± SEM. Unpaired two‐sided t‐tests and one‐way ANOVA (with an alpha value of 0.05) were performed using GraphPad Prism (version 10) to compare two and three independent groups, respectively.