DiscussionIn this randomized, placebo-controlled, dose-finding study in patients receiving dialysis with hs-CRP ≥ 2 mg l−1, targeting the IL-6 pathway with clazakizumab given by intravenous bolus every 4 weeks significantly reduced serum concentrations of hs-CRP by 90% or more. Clazakizumab reduced serum concentrations of hs-CRP to <2 mg l−1 in approximately 80% of patients compared with 0% of patients treated with placebo. The drug was well tolerated overall with no cases of sustained moderate-to-severe thrombocytopenia or neutropenia. The proportion of patients who experienced a serious infection was similar among patients randomized to placebo, clazakizumab 2.5 mg and clazakizumab 5 mg. Serious infections were numerically more frequent among patients randomized to the clazakizumab 10 mg dose.Chronic inflammation predicts cardiovascular events in the general population as well as in patients with dialysis- and nondialysis-requiring chronic kidney disease (CKD). In 1974, Lindner et al. published the first description of accelerated atherosclerosis in patients receiving maintenance dialysis17. Since then, large registry-based and other studies have highlighted the exceptionally high rates of cardiovascular events and mortality experienced by this population. Conventional therapies to lower cardiovascular risk, including lipid-lowering with statins, have shown little to no benefit in patients receiving dialysis3–5,21; moreover, the effects of intensification of dialysis dose—whether applied in the hemodialysis or peritoneal dialysis setting—have proved burdensome and largely unsuccessful. Multiple reports have supported the hypothesis that inflammation may substantially contribute to cardiovascular risk22,23. Clinical trials of anti-inflammatory agents including canakinumab, a monoclonal antibody targeting IL-1β (ref. 12) and colchicine24,25, which largely included participants with normal or near-normal kidney function, yielded sizeable reductions in the risk of cardiovascular events. IL-6 is a central inflammatory cytokine that is elevated in patients undergoing dialysis and is an independent predictor of cardiovascular events. Mendelian randomization studies have also supported a potential causal link between the activation of IL-6 and cardiovascular events10,26–28. In the CANTOS trial, the treatment effect of canakinumab appeared to be mediated by modulation of IL-6 levels, a downstream cytokine of IL-1. Patients with estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) < 60 ml min−1 1.73 m−2 experienced an 18% reduction in the relative risk of the primary composite endpoint of cardiovascular death or nonfatal myocardial infarction or stroke22,29 patients who achieved hs-CRP < 2 mg l−1 experienced a 32% lower risk30. In this phase 2b trial, approximately 80% of clazakizumab-treated patients achieved hs-CRP < 2 mg l−1, suggesting the potential for cardiovascular benefits with longer-term clazakizumab treatment. We also observed reductions in downstream biomarkers of IL-6 activity including a significant reduction in lipoprotein(a), which is a potential target for CV event reduction. In addition, a noteworthy effect of clazakizumab was a significant increase in albumin, not only because of the strong association between low serum albumin concentrations and mortality in patients receiving dialysis31 but also because few other controlled interventions have demonstrated the ability to increase serum albumin in this population32–34.In the setting of mild to moderate CKD, treatment with the IL-6 ligand inhibitor ziltivekimab resulted in comparable reductions in hs-CRP and several other cardiovascular biomarkers35. On that basis, a large-scale cardiovascular outcomes trial is being conducted among patients with known atherosclerosis, elevated hs-CRP and eGFR ≥15 and <60 ml min−1 1.73 m−2(ref. 36). The Hemodialysis Novel Therapies Consortium conducted a multicenter, randomized, placebo-controlled pilot trial of anakinra, an IL-1 antagonist, in 80 patients receiving maintenance hemodialysis with hs-CRP > 2 mg l−1(ref. 37). The median decrease in hs-CRP from baseline to week 24 was 41% in the anakinra group and 6% in the placebo group, a between-group difference that was not statistically significant. Rates of serious adverse events were virtually identical in the two groups.Clazakizumab has been studied in multiple phase 2 studies, primarily in inflammatory diseases with generally favorable preliminary results. In a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, dose-ranging study in 418 patients with rheumatoid arthritis and an inadequate response to methotrexate, clazakizumab alone or in combination with methotrexate yielded substantially reduced disease activity compared to methotrexate alone; rates of serious adverse events ranged from 8.3% to 13.6% (ref. 38). In a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, dose-ranging study in 165 patients with active psoriatic arthritis and an inadequate response to nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, the safety profile was consistent with the pharmacology of IL-6 blockade39. Previously completed studies used doses ranging from 1 to 640 mg, with frequency ranging from every 3 to 8 weeks apart. Given that patients receiving maintenance dialysis are at high risk of infection, we aimed to identify one or more doses that produced a robust and sustained reduction of hs-CRP while minimizing the risk of adverse effects.The phase 2b component of our trial has several strengths. It was randomized, double-blinded, and adequately powered for its primary outcome. Participants were broadly representative of the US dialysis population in terms of distribution by age and sex. There was ample representation of Black and Latina/Latino participants and an over-representation of patients with diabetes, by design. We obtained week 12 data on 107 (80%) participants and collected longer-term data on a sizeable fraction of patients. In addition to obtaining definitive data describing the effects of clazakizumab on hs-CRP, we demonstrated significant reductions in several other downstream biomarkers of IL-6 activity.Limitations of the trial include a modest sample size and a relatively short duration of follow-up. It is possible that adverse effects, such as infections, might become more frequent with extended exposure to clazakizumab. We did not collect data on residual kidney function, and the sample size was insufficient to reasonably conduct subgroup analyses on selected clinical parameters (for example, male or female patients, patients with or without diabetes, patients stratified by prevalent vascular access—fistula or graft or tunneled catheter), which could have confounded the effects of clazakizumab on inflammatory markers. While we intend to include patients receiving peritoneal dialysis in the phase 3 component of the trial, no such patients participated in the phase 2b component.In sum, among patients receiving maintenance hemodialysis with documented inflammation, clazakizumab reduced inflammatory biomarkers associated with cardiovascular events and increased serum albumin. The safety profile of clazakizumab appeared acceptable and consistent with its mechanism of action. Reporting summaryFurther information on research design is available in the Nature Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article.