4. DiscussionThe results described above strongly suggest that capture immunoassay can be performed using SiHG contact lenses. As presently designed, the biomarker contact lens (BM-CL) will be placed on the patient’s eye for a given period of time, removed, and then the emission measured with a nearby fluorescence spectrofluorometer. Many such devices have been reported using cell phones or other array detectors , and point-of-care measurements are readily available. The excitation light will most likely come from an external source such as electroluminescent (EL) panels, which are available with single-color or multi-color output such as those used in computer servers. Such panels are available at a low cost, typically less than USD 10. Cell phone detectors will require careful setting of the lens and detector to override the automatic features using the cell phone controls or by using dedicated apps . Because the BM-CL will be removed from the patient prior to measurement, other types of probes can be used for detection. The so-called time-resolved immunoassay can be performed using long-lifetime lanthanides bound to the detection antibody. In this case, the incident light is turned off prior to integrating the long live lanthanide emission . Enzyme-amplified ELISAs could also be used . Recently, an all-organic nanoparticle has been described with decay times of 200 to 300 ms . The authors designed a pocket size reader, without optical filters, costing less than USD 20.Tear fluid contains disease-specific biomarkers with diagnostic capabilities. For instance, some significant biomarkers include (i) Tau, amyloid-β-42, and lysozyme-C associated with Alzheimer’s disease; (ii) peroxiredoxin-6 and α-synuclein linked to Parkinson’s disease; (iii) lactotransferrin and lipophilin-A relevant to diabetic retinopathy; (iv) zinc-alpha-2 glycoprotein-1, prolactin, and calcium-binding protein-A4 pertaining to Graves’ orbitopathy; and (v) interleukin-6, interleukin-1β, TNF-α, and MMP-9 involved in dry eye disease . These biomarkers demonstrate the diagnostic importance of tear analysis in systemic and ocular conditions.Our approach to basal tear biomarker assays has many potential advantages. While biomarkers can result from disease in any part of the body , the initial use of this BM-CL will be for the detection and diagnosis of ocular surface disease (OSD) (Figure 8). Many OSDs are known, including dry eye disease (DED), inflammation of the eyelid (blepharitis), inflammation due to allergies (conjunctivitis), membrane gland dysfunction (MGD), glioma, or injury to the delicate corneal surface.The usefulness of our BM-CL can be seen by tests currently conducted in an ophthalmology office. The OSD mentioned above resulted in elevated levels of matrix metallprotease-9 in tears (MMP-9), which is one of the many MMP9s responsible for tissue remodeling . Any damage or inflammation of the cornea results in high levels of MMP-9, which digests the tight junctions and allows tears to mix with the stroma. At present, the MMP-9 in tears is measured in two ways. Both methods require a sample of basal-level tears, which are collected with a capillary tube. Because of the small volume, the samples are sent out for amplified assays such as ELISA or PCR. The results are not returned for several days or a week, and are therefore not useful in a typical ophthalmology office visit.The use of the SCL for clinical testing will require a decision regarding how long the lens should be left on the eye. This will depend on the concentration of MMP-9 or other target analytes, the flow rate of the tears, and the efficiency of MMP-9 binding during passage over or under the lens. At this time, the fraction of tear fluid that passes across the lens (by the PLTF or PoLTF) or around the control lens is not known. Mixing occurs in the PLTF and PoLTF dye upon blinking . Commercial contact lenses can have different surface treatments , which can affect binding efficiency. We expect the biomarker binding efficiency to be high for several reasons. In other tests with flow devices, the binding efficiency was found to increase in thinner or smaller spaces . This effect is probably the result of transitional diffusion in the film, which results in repeated collision with the CL surface. Another potential advantage of the SCL is the highly sensitive detection of low-concentration biomarkers. For example, if the lens remains on the eye for 30 min, the tear volume will be exchanged about four times, and a low-concentration biomarker could be collected from a large volume of tear flow.In summary, we have demonstrated that a three-layer protein capture assay could be accomplished with a commercial SiHG contact lens. At present, we imagine the SCL will be removed from the eye and then exposed to the labeled detection Ab. Since this concept has not been tested in vivo, there is much to learn about the performance of these lenses. Point-of-care measurements, whether in vivo or after lens removal, are most accurately performed by a wavelength–ratiometric or lifetime-based measurement. This could be accomplished by the placement of a reference fluorophore in the SiHG to serve as an intensity or lifetime standard. SiHG lenses are known to bind hydrophobic fluorophores or fluorophores with hydrophobic side chains. We are hopeful that these results contribute to the increasing use of tears for diagnostic testing.