MethodsRetrospective multi-institutional nsNSCLC patient cohortStudy populationReviews of electronic medical records were performed for patients from 22 academic institutions in North America and Europe, including MD Anderson Cancer Center, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, Ohio State University, Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Massachusetts General Hospital, Cleveland Clinic, University of Chicago, Yale University, University of Pennsylvania, University of Colorado, University of Cologne, UHN Research, Columbia University Medical Center, Gustave Roussy, John’s Hopkins, Stanford University, University of Torino–Orbassano, University of California Davis, University of California Los Angeles, University of California San Francisco, Moffitt Cancer Center and University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. Patients with stage IV nsNSCLC who received treatment with either (a) carboplatin or cisplatin, pemetrexed and pembrolizumab (PCP cohort) or (b) carboplatin or cisplatin and pemetrexed before the regulatory approval of PCP at each medical jurisdiction (CP cohort), were alive for 14 or more days after the start of treatment and had genomic profiling results that included STK11 (for patients in the PCP cohort) and STK11 and/or KEAP1 (for patients in the CP cohort) available from tumour or blood before starting first-line systemic therapy were eligible. Patients who had tumours with sensitizing EGFR mutations or ALK rearrangements were excluded. Patients treated with bevacizumab as part of first-line systemic therapy were excluded. Prior immunotherapy was not allowed; prior neoadjuvant or adjuvant chemotherapy for early-stage surgically resectable disease or as part of concurrent chemoradiation for locally advanced disease was allowed if completed at least five months before the initiation of systemic therapy for stage IV disease. The dataset was locked on 31 December 2018 for the PFS analysis and on 31 August 2019 for the OS analysis. Patient information was collected through chart review. Tumour cell PD-L1 expression was available for 88.6% of patients in the PCP cohort and was determined with the Dako 22C3 pharmDx or 28-8 pharmDx, Ventana SP263 or Ventana SP142 and E1L3N assays (data regarding the used assay were not available for 15 patients). The study was approved by an Institutional Review Board (IRB) at participating centres and included a waiver of patient informed consent. This study was conducted in accordance with ethical guidelines including the Declaration of Helsinki and US Common Rule.Genomic profilingPatients must have had genomic profiling results including STK11 (for patients in the PCP cohort) and STK11 and/or KEAP1 (for patients in the CP cohort) from tumour and/or plasma prior to starting first-line systemic therapy to be included in the analysis. Only tests performed through commercially approved assays or in a CLIA-certified laboratory were allowed. When available, we integrated results from tumour and plasma profiling for the analysis. All nonsynonymous STK11 and KEAP1 missense mutations and bi-allelic deletions were considered pathogenic. Cross-platform TMB harmonization was performed by applying a normal transformation followed by standardization to z-scores as previously described51. A threshold of 8.58 mutations per Mb for harmonized TMB (representing the whole-exome sequencing equivalent of 10 mutations per Mb in the FoundationOne CDx assay) was used as a cut-off to separate patients with low (<8.58 mutations per Mb) versus high (≥8.58 mutations per Mb) TMB.Survival and objective response analysesFor the PFS analysis, data for patients who were alive and had no evidence of progression at the time of dataset lock or who were lost to follow-up were censored at the time of the last radiologic tumour assessment. For the OS analysis, data for patients who were alive or lost to follow-up at the time of dataset lock were censored at the time of the last documented patient contact. The Kaplan–Meier method was used to estimate PFS and OS, and differences were assessed by log-rank test. HRs and corresponding CIs were estimated with the use of a stratified Cox proportional hazards model adjusted for clinical variables (age, history of brain metastasis, performance status (0−1 versus >1)). Best response was determined through investigator-assessed RECIST v.1.1. ORR was defined as the percentage of response-evaluable patients who achieved a complete or partial response. Patients who died 14 days or more after the start of first-line systemic therapy, but before the first restaging scan, were considered to have progressive disease. Attribution of stable disease as best overall response to therapy required a minimum interval of 30 days between the first day of the first cycle of treatment (C1D1) and radiologic evaluation. Differences in categorical variables were assessed by two-sided Fisher’s exact test. Significance was established at P ≤ 0.05. Statistical analysis was performed in IBM SPSS Statistics v.24.0, R v.4.1.2 (2021-11-01) and SAS v.9.4.POSEIDON phase III randomized clinical trial datasetStudy populationStudy design and patient eligibility criteria for the POSEIDON global phase III randomized clinical trial (ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT03164616) have been previously described3. In brief, patients were eligible if they were at least 18 years old, were diagnosed with stage IV NSCLC and had not previously received systemic therapy for metastatic NSCLC; had ECOG PS 0 or 1; and had measurable disease according to RECIST v.1.1. Tumour PD-L1 expression assessment at a central laboratory using the VENTANA PD-L1 (SP263) immunohistochemistry assay (Ventana Medical Systems) was required before random assignment. Patients who had tumours with sensitizing EGFR mutations or ALK rearrangements were not eligible to participate in the study. Patients with treated and stable brain metastases were eligible.TreatmentPatients were randomly assigned (1:1:1) with stratification by PD-L1 expression (≥50% versus <50% of tumour cells), disease stage (IVA versus IVB, per the International Association for the Study of Lung Cancer Staging Manual in Thoracic Oncology v.8) and histology (squamous versus nonsquamous) to one of three treatment arms: (1) tremelimumab 75 mg plus durvalumab 1,500 mg and chemotherapy for up to four 21-day cycles, followed by durvalumab 1,500 mg once every 4 weeks until disease progression (PD), with one additional tremelimumab dose after chemotherapy at week 16/cycle 6 (fifth dose) (TDCT arm); (2) durvalumab 1,500 mg plus chemotherapy for up to four 21-day cycles, followed by durvalumab 1,500 mg once every 4 weeks until PD (DCT arm); or (3) platinum doublet chemotherapy for up to six 21-day cycles (CT arm). Only patients with nsNSCLC enrolled in POSEIDON were included in the analysis. Chemotherapy options for patients with nonsquamous histology included cisplatin or carboplatin and pemetrexed or, alternatively, carboplatin and nab-paclitaxel. Patients with nonsquamous histology who received pemetrexed–platinum doublet could receive pemetrexed maintenance therapy if eligible. Patients continued treatment until PD, unacceptable toxicity or withdrawal of consent. In-study crossover was not allowed.The study was performed in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and the International Conference on Harmonisation Good Clinical Practice guidelines. The protocol and all modifications were approved by relevant ethics committees and regulatory authorities. All patients provided written informed consent.End-points and statistical analysisThe primary end-points were progression-free survival (PFS), evaluated by blinded independent central review (BICR) per RECIST v.1.1, and overall survival (OS) for DCT versus CT. PFS was defined as the time from random assignment to objective PD or death from any cause in the absence of progression and OS as the time from random assignment to death from any cause. Key alpha-controlled secondary end-points were PFS and OS for TDCT versus CT.A hierarchical multiple testing procedure with a gatekeeping strategy was used across the primary end-points and alpha-controlled secondary end-points. First, 1% alpha and 4% alpha were allocated to PFS and OS, respectively, for the DCT versus CT comparison. Positivity for either primary end-point enabled alpha recycling to the key secondary PFS and OS end-points (TDCT versus CT). If either of the key secondary PFS or OS end-points was met, the alpha could be recycled to the other key secondary end-point. The primary and key secondary PFS and OS analyses were performed using a stratified log-rank test adjusted for the stratification variables of tumour PD-L1 expression, disease stage and histology, with HRs and 95% CIs estimated using a stratified Cox proportional hazards model. ORR was analysed using a logistic regression model, adjusted for the same factors as the primary end-points, and odds ratios and 95% CIs calculated. The Kaplan–Meier method was used to calculate median OS, PFS and DoR. Efficacy data were analysed in the biomarker-evaluable nsNSCLC population.POSEIDON biomarker analysesPre-treatment tumour tissue or plasma samples underwent next-generation sequencing (NGS) of DNA through Foundation Medicine’s FoundationOne CDx assay for tissue and Guardant Health’s GuardantOMNI assay for ctDNA. Pre-treatment tumour tissue samples were scored for tumour cell expression of PD-L1 using the VENTANA PD-L1 (SP263) immunohistochemistry assay, with a 1% or 50% cut-off for positivity. TMB was assessed as described previously52. Samples were considered altered in STK11 or KEAP1 if there was detection of a known nonsynonymous somatic mutation, as described in OncoKB53, any truncating alteration, including frameshift insertions and deletions, splice site mutations within 2 bp of exon, or homozygous deletion of one or more exons; and altered for KRAS if there was detection of a known missense somatic hotspot mutation.Exploratory analyses of PFS (by (BICR) per RECIST v.1.1) and OS were performed using Kaplan–Meier estimates, with HRs and 95% CIs estimated using unstratified Cox proportional hazards models. ORRs were calculated using confirmed responses (at least one visit response of complete response or partial response and a confirmatory scan no sooner than four weeks after the initial response) by BICR per RECIST v.1.1. Kaplan–Meier estimates were used to describe the duration of response, defined as the time from the first documentation of complete response/partial response until the date of progression, death in absence of progression or the last evaluable RECIST assessment for patients who progressed or died after two or more missed visits. Analyses were performed using SAS v.9.4 and R v.4.2.0.Foundation Medicine cohortA large cohort of 8,592 unselected patients with LUAD who submitted samples to FMI for hybrid capture-based comprehensive genomic profiling were included in an integrated analysis of TMB, PD-L1 expression and genomic alterations of individual cancer-related genes. Approval for this study, including a waiver of informed consent and a HIPAA waiver of authorization, was obtained from the Western Institutional Review Board (protocol no. 20152817). Samples submitted to Foundation Medicine were processed at a CLIA-certified laboratory as described previously54. TMB was measured by Foundation Medicine as described previously52. Raw TMB values were measured in units of mutations per Mb sequenced and characterized as low (TMB < 6), intermediate (6 ≤ TMB < 20) or high (TMB ≥ 20). Assessment of tumour cell PD-L1 expression in the FMI cohort was based on the Dako 22C3 pharmDx assay. Tumours were characterized as PD-L1 negative (PD-L1 TPS < 1%), low positive (PD-L1 TPS 1-49%) or high positive (PD-L1 TPS ≥ 50%). In the FMI cohort, a LUAD sample was considered altered in STK11 or KEAP1 if there was detection of a known or likely pathogenic nonsynonymous somatic mutation, any truncating alteration or bi-allelic loss. Statistical analyses were assessed by two-sided Fisher’s exact test and significance was established at FDR-adjusted P ≤ 0.05.MD Anderson Cancer Center mIF cohortSurgically resected early-stage human NSCLC specimens obtained at the MD Anderson Cancer Center were evaluated by multiplex immunofluorescence (mIF), following a similar methodology to that previously described55. In brief, 4-µm-thick formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tumour sections were stained using an automated staining system (BOND-RX; Leica Microsystems), applying previously validated mIF antibody panels55. Staining was performed sequentially according to each corresponding fluorophore in the Opal 7 colour IHC kit (NEL797001KT; Akoya Biosciences), including DAPI and Opal Polaris 520, 540, 570, 620, 650, 690 and coumarin. Stained tissue microarray (TMA) slides were scanned using the multispectral microscope, PhenoImager HT (formerly Vectra Polaris) 1.0.13 imaging system (Akoya Biosciences), under fluorescence at low magnification at 10× and high magnification at 20×. Each core from the TMAs was analysed using InForm 2.8.2 image analysis software (Akoya Biosciences). Marker colocalization was used to identify different cellular phenotypes and quantify the number of cells per mm2. Data were consolidated using RStudio 3.5.3 (Phenopter 0.2.2; https://rdrr.io/github/akoyabio/phenoptrReports/f/, Akoya Biosciences). NGS-based genomic profiling was obtained by either whole-exome sequencing (WES) or CLIA-certified clinical NGS assays as part of routine standard of care and was accessed as part of an IRB-approved research protocol.Analysis of the ICON NSCLC cohortTumour samples from patients enrolled in the ICON cohort56 with nsNSCLC histology, no prior neoadjuvant chemotherapy and available transcriptional profiling data were considered eligible (n = 57). Raw RNA-seq data underwent normalization and transformation using the vsd function from DESeq2. Z-scores and average gene expression data were used for signature-based evaluation of immune cell subsets. TH1 levels and overall immune infiltrate (ImmuneScore) were estimated as gene signatures using XCell57 and plotted according to the presence of STK11 and/or KEAP1 somatic mutations or functional status using previously validated signatures for LKB1 deficiency58 or NRF2 transcriptional activation8. Neutrophil, macrophage and CD8+ T cell signature data were assessed with MCPCounter to obtain ratios per sample. All analyses were performed using Python v3.9 and R v.4.3.1.Analysis of the TCGA PanCancer Atlas lung adenocarcinoma datasetPaired WES, RNA-seq and clinical data from patients with LUAD from the TCGA PanCancer Atlas cohort were downloaded from the cBioPortal for Cancer Genomics repository59. Immune cell subsets were estimated using aggregated data from TIMER2.060, which provides standardized output from six different immune estimation methods. Neutrophil, macrophage and CD8+ T cell signature data were assessed with MCPCounter to obtain ratios per sample. QuanTIseq was used to compare T cell and nonregulatory CD4 levels across mutation groups. Overall immune infiltrate (ImmuneScore) and TH1 levels were estimated as gene signatures using XCell57. Comparisons across groups were performed using the Kruskal–Wallis H test. Analyses were performed using R v.4.0.3.In vivo CRISPR–Cas9 screen for drivers of immune evasion and PD-1 inhibitor resistanceLibrary design and constructionWe established a library of 1,813 sgRNAs targeting 162 genes, with a focus on genes with loss-of-function mutations or deletions in cancer. In addition, we included known essential genes, immune resistance genes and immune sensitizing genes, to assess and validate the in vivo screening platform. Eleven per cent of the sgRNAs included in the library represented non-targeting controls. sgRNA oligos were cloned into a lentiCRISPR v2 plasmid61, using Gibson assembly.Cell line engineeringThe 3LL Lewis lung carcinoma cell line was purchased from the JCRB cell bank. 3LL cells were grown in RPMI-1640 with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS) at 37 °C with 5% CO2. 293FT cells were purchased from Invitrogen and were grown in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) with 10% heat-inactivated FBS. A lentiviral vector library was produced in 293FT cells with transfection of library plasmids plus packaging helper plasmids psPAX2 and pVSVG using lipofectamine 3000 (Invitrogen). Virus-containing supernatant was collected 66 h after transfection and concentrated by ultracentrifugation. 3LL cells were transduced with the sgRNA library at an infection rate of 30% and subjected to puromycin selection four days after infection to generate stable cells. Cells were passaged several times in culture, to allow for effective gene editing.In vivo CRISPR screeningThe in vivo screen was conducted at WuXi AppTec, China. The study design was approved by the WuXi AppTec Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC). Six-to-eight-week-old BALBc nude mice and C57BL/6J mice were purchased from Shanghai SLAC Laboratory Animal Co. For screening, 2 × 106 library-transduced 3LL cells, resuspended in 0.1 ml phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), were injected subcutaneously into the right flank. Mice were grouped for treatment when average tumour volume reached approximately 40–60 mm3 on day 0. C57BL/6J mice were treated by intraperitoneal injection with anti-mPD-1 (BioXCell, BE0146) or anti-IgG2a (BioXCell, BE0089) at 5 mg per kg or 10 mg per kg, twice per week for two weeks. Tumours were measured every other day and tumour volume was estimated with the formula (L × W2)/2. Mice were euthanized and tumours collected for genomic DNA extraction when the average tumour volume for the group reached around 1,000 mm3. Tumours from the nude mice group and the C57BL/6 groups were collected on day 11 and day 13, respectively. For genomic DNA extraction, tumour tissues were ground by FreezerMill in liquid nitrogen. Tissue powders were used for DNA extraction using the Blood & Cell Culture DNA Midi kit or Mini kit (Qiagen), according to the manufacturer’s protocol.Data analysisGenomic DNA isolation and sequencing were performed as previously described62. To normalize the raw counts of sgRNA guides in each sample, a sample-specific size factor was determined by the ratio of the median count of the non-targeting control guides to the one of the plasmid pool. The raw counts were scaled by multiplying the sample-specific size factors for each sample and adding one to all the values. The log2-transformed fold change for each sgRNA in each perturbed arm was calculated using the control arm as a reference and averaged over biological replicates. The gene-level log2-transformed fold change was computed by averaging the sgRNAs targeting the same gene. Raw sgRNA counts were also used as input into MAGeCK to call significantly enriched and depleted genes using the MAGeCK Python package v.0.5.763,64. The median ratio of non-targeting sgRNAs was chosen as the normalization method when running MAGeCK. Gene-level score matrices included log2-transformed fold change, FDR and P values.Multiplexed in vivo assessment of TSG loss-selective vulnerability to single and dual ICB in autochthonous KrasG12D-driven LUAD using Tuba-seqDesign and generation of Lenti-sgRNA/Cre vectorsWe generated lentiviral vectors encoding Cre (expressed from a PGK promoter65) and an sgRNA (expressed from a human U6 promoter) targeting each of the following 22 genes, which are known or putative tumour suppressors that are recurrently mutated in LUAD (or pan-carcinoma) and represent diverse cancer pathways66,67: Apc, Arid2, Atm, Atrx, Brca2, Cdkn2a, Cmtr2, Keap1, Kmt2d, Mga, Nf1, Pten, Ptprd, Rb1, Rbm10, Rnf43, Setd2, Smad4, Stag2, Stk11, Trp53 and Tsc1. Vectors encoding ‘inert’ sgRNAs were also generated: sgRosa26-1, sgRosa26-2, sgRosa26-3, sgNT-1, sgNT-2 and sgNT-3.sgRNAs were designed and selected as follows. First, all possible 20-bp sgRNAs (using an NGG PAM) targeting each gene of interest were identified and scored for predicted on-target cutting efficiency using an available sgRNA design/scoring algorithm68. For each TSG, we then selected the sgRNA predicted to be the most likely to produce null alleles: preference was given to sgRNAs that were previously validated in vivo32,69,70, had the highest predicted on-target cutting efficiencies, targeted exons conserved in all known splice isoforms (ENSEMBL), targeted splice acceptor/splice donor sites, were positioned earliest in the gene coding region, occurred upstream of or within annotated functional domains (InterPro; UniProt), and occurred upstream of or at known recurrent mutation sites in human LUAD. The sgRNA sequences for each target are listed in Supplementary Table 1.To generate Lenti-sgRNA/Cre vectors containing each sgRNA, a double-stranded DNA fragment (IDT gBlock) containing a U6-sgRNA-tracrRNA cassette flanked by restriction sites (AscI and SbfI) was synthesized and digested by AscI and SbfI. This digested DNA fragment was then cloned into an AscI/SbfI-digested parental lentivector encoding Cre to produce each circularized Lenti-sgRNA/Cre vector.Barcode diversification of Lenti-sgRNA/CreTo enable quantification of the number of cancer cells in individual tumours in parallel using high-throughput sequencing, we diversified the Lenti-sgRNA/Cre vectors with a 46-bp multi-component barcode cassette that would be unique to each tumour by virtue of stable integration of the lentiviral vector into the initial transduced cell. This 46-bp DNA barcode cassette consisted of a known 6-nucleotide ID specific to the vector backbone (vectorID), a 10-nucleotide ID specific to each individual sgRNA (sgID) and a 30-nucleotide random barcode containing 20 degenerate bases (random BC).The 46-bp barcode cassette for each sgRNA was flanked by universal Illumina TruSeq adapter sequences and synthesized as single-stranded DNA oligos. Forward and reverse primers complimentary to the universal TruSeq sequences and containing 5’ tails with restriction enzyme sites (AscI and NotI) were used in a PCR reaction to generate and amplify double-stranded barcode cassettes for cloning. Each Lenti-sgRNA/Cre vector and its matching insert barcode PCR product was digested with AscI and NotI.To generate a large number of uniquely barcoded vectors, we ligated 1 µg of linearize vector and 50 ng of insert with T4 DNA ligase in a 100 µl ligation reaction. Four to five hours after incubation at room temperature, ligated DNA was precipitated by centrifugation at 14,000 rpm for 12 min after adding 5 µl glycogen (5 mg ml−1) and 280 µl 100% ethanol into the ligation reaction. The DNA pellet was washed with 80% ethanol and air-dried before being resuspended with 10 µl water. This 10 µl well-dissolved DNA was transformed into 100 µl of SURE electrical competent cells using a Bio-Rad electroporation system following the manufacturer’s instructions. Electroporation-transformed cells were immediately recovered by adding into 5 ml pre-warmed SOC medium. From these 5 ml of bacteria, 10 µl were further diluted with LB ampicillin broth, and a final dilution of 1:200,000 was plated on an LB ampicillin plate for incubation at 37 °C. The remaining bacteria were mixed gently and thoroughly before being inoculated into 100 ml LB ampicillin broth, shaking at 220 rpm at 37 °C overnight. The next day, colony numbers on the LB ampicillin plate were counted to estimate the complexity of each library and the 100 ml bacterial culture was pelleted for plasmid purification.Eight colonies from each library were picked and PCR screened for verification of the specific sgRNA sequence and corresponding barcode sequence among these eight colonies. The final purified library plasmid for each library was again sequence verified.Production, purification and titration of lentivirusTwenty-four hours before transfection, 2.4 × 107 293T cells were plated on a 15-cm tissue culture plate. Thirty micrograms of pPack (packaging plasmid mix) and 15 µg of library plasmid DNA were mixed well in 1.5 ml serum-free DMEM before an equal volume of serum-free DMEM containing 90 µl LipoD293 was added. The resulting mixture was incubated at room temperature for 10–20 min before adding into 293T cells. At 24 h after transfection, the medium containing complexes was replaced with 30 ml of fresh DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS, DNase I (1 unit per ml), MgCl2 (5 mM) and 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.4. The entire virus-containing medium from each plate was collected and filtered through a 0.2-µm PES filter (Nalgene) at 48 h after transfection. The viruses were further concentrated by centrifugation at 18,500 rpm, 4 °C for 2 h, and the pellet was resuspended in 500 µl PBS buffer. Virus aliquots of 50 µl were stored at −80 °C.To quantify the titre of packaged library constructs, 105 LSL-YFP MEF cells71 were transduced with 1 µl viruses in 1 ml culture medium containing 5 µg ml−1 polybrene. Transduced cells were incubated for 72 h before being collected for FACS analysis to measure the percentage of YFP-positive cells. Control viruses were used in parallel to normalize the virus titres.Pooling of Lenti-sgRNA/Cre vectorsTo generate a pool of barcoded Lenti-sgRNA/Cre vectors for the initiation of multiple tumour genotypes within individual mice, barcoded Lenti-sgRNA/Cre vectors targeting the 22 genes described above (Apc, Arid2, Atm, Atrx, Brca2, Cdkn2a, Cmtr2, Keap1, Kmt2d, Mga, Nf1, Pten, Ptprd, Rb1, Rbm10, Rnf43, Setd2, Smad4, Stag2, Stk11, Trp53 and Tsc1), and those containing the inert, negative control sgRNAs, were combined such that the viruses would be at equal ratios in relation to their estimated in vitro or in vivo titres. The virus pool was diluted with 1× Dulbecco’s phosphate buffered saline (DPBS) to reach a titre of 180,000 transduction units (TU).Mice, tumour initiation and tissue collection for in vivo studyKrasLSL-G12D and H11LSL-Cas9 alleles have been described previously71,72. A total of 125 male and female KrasLSL-G12D/+H11LSL-Cas9/LSL-Cas9 (KC) mice in a BL6 background (B6J), ranging from 14 to 22 weeks of age, were received from Jackson Laboratories on 19 February 2020. Mice were housed five per cage in Explora Biolabs and acclimated before initiation of the study. Housing was in a barrier, pathogen-free ventilated rack with autoclaved tap-water. Food and water were given ad libitum. Mice were identified individually by ear tag. The study performed by Pionyr Immunotherapeutics was under the guidance of and approved by the IACUC of Explora BioLabs.Lung tumours were initiated in mice at 15–23 weeks of age via intratracheal delivery under isoflurane anaesthesia of 2 × 104–5 × 105 TU of a lentivirus pool containing barcoded Lenti-sgRNA/Cre vectors targeting the 22 different genes described above (Apc, Arid2, Atm, Atrx, Brca2, Cdkn2a, Cmtr2, Keap1, Kmt2d, Mga, Nf1, Pten, Ptprd, Rb1, Rbm10, Rnf43, Setd2, Smad4, Stag2, Stk11, Trp53 and Tsc1), as well as three sgRNAs targeting the NeoR gene (sgNeo-1, sgNeo-2 and sgNeo-3) and three non-targeting sgRNAs (sgNT-1, sgNT-2 and sgNT-3).After lung tumours developed for 12 weeks after transduction, mice were randomized into 4 groups of 20 mice each (equally distributed across sex) before initiation of treatment. Mice were dosed every five days intraperitoneally with the indicated antibodies on the basis of the average body weight of each group. Throughout the in-life portion of the study, individual body weights and health monitoring were checked twice per week.Cohorts of mice were treated as follows:Group 1: Mouse IgG1 isotype control (clone MOPC-21) and mouse IgG2a (clone C1.18.4 in an afucosylated format) delivered intraperitoneally (IP), at 5 mg per kg with once daily dosing, every 5 days for 2 weeks until takedown at 14 weeks after tumour initiation.Group 2: Anti-PD-1 (clone RMP1-14 recombinantly produced as mouse IgG1 D265A format) delivered IP, at 5 mg per kg with once daily dosing, every 5 days for 2 weeks until takedown at 14 weeks after tumour initiation.Group 3: Anti-CTLA4 (clone 9D9 in mouse IgG2b format produced at BioXcell, BP0164) delivered IP, at 10 mg per kg once daily dosing, every 5 days for 2 weeks until takedown at 14 weeks after tumour initiation.Group 4: Anti-PD-1 delivered IP, at 5 mg per kg and anti-CTLA4 delivered IP, at 10 mg per kg with once daily dosing, every 5 days for 2 weeks until takedown at 14 weeks after tumour initiation.After treatment, whole lung tissue was extracted from euthanized mice as previously described32. Lung mass measurements were recorded as a proxy for overall lung tumour burden and were then stored at −80 °C before subsequent processing for NGS (see sections below).Generation of double-stranded DNA spike-in controlsDNA barcode cassettes comprising 46-bp barcode cassettes and flanked by universal Illumina TruSeq adapter sequences as well as additional buffer sequences to extend their total length to more than 400 bp were generated either by direct synthesis of the double-stranded DNA fragments (GeneWiz, IDT) or by synthesis of single-stranded DNA oligos (GeneWiz, IDT) with overlapping complementary regions that were extended and amplified by PCR to create double-stranded DNA products that were then purified. Aliquots of these stock double-stranded DNA fragments were diluted to the desired copy numbers using DNase-free ultra-pure H2O and stored at −20 °C.Generation of cell spike-in controlsDNA barcode cassettes comprising known 46-bp sequences were flanked by universal Illumina TruSeq adapter sequences and synthesized as single-stranded DNA oligos. Forward and reverse primers complimentary to the universal TruSeq sequences and containing 5′ tails with restriction enzyme sites (Xba1 and BstB1) were used in a PCR reaction to generate and amplify double-stranded barcode cassettes for cloning. A lentivector pRCMERP-CMV-MCS-EF1-TagR-Puro and each of the barcode insert PCR products were digested by Xba1 and BstB1 restriction enzymes.Each digested barcode insert was cloned into a linearized vector by T4 DNA ligase and transformed into OmniMax chemical competent cells (Invitrogen). Colonies from each transformation plate were screened by PCR and sequencing. One positive clone from each barcode-containing construct was cultured for plasmid DNA extraction. Virus was packaged from each of the barcoded pRCMERP constructs in six-well plates using pPack packaging mix and LipoD293 reagent. Virus-containing medium was collected at 48 h after transfection and filtered with a Nalgene 0.2-μm PES filter before being frozen down in aliquots at −80 °C. Small aliquots of frozen viruses were thawed and added into HEK293 cells in 12-well plates for measuring titre by FACS analysis 72 h after transduction.To generate individual cell lines containing each barcode construct, virus-containing medium was added to HEK293 cells at a multiplicity of infection of 0.1 in 10-cm plates. After overnight incubation, cells were recovered in fresh EMEM complete medium for 48 h before splitting into a new plate containing 1 μg ml−1 puro in complete EMEM medium for puro selection. After three days of puro selection, barcode-containing HEK293 cells were recovered in fresh EMEM complete medium without puro for another three days before being further expanded in 10-cm plates. Each established cell line was quality controlled by PCR amplification of the barcode region from genomic DNA to confirm the integration of the correct barcode sequences.After cell expansion, cells from each barcoded HEK293 cell line were collected and diluted in PBS buffer containing 0.1% BSA to the desired concentrations. These cell suspensions were aliquoted and frozen down at −80 °C.Isolation of genomic DNA from mouse lungsWhole lungs were removed from the freezer and allowed to thaw at room temperature. Spike-ins were added to each whole lung sample. Qiagen cell lysis buffer and proteinase K from the Qiagen Gentra PureGene Tissue kit (158689) was added as described in the manufacturer protocol. Whole lungs plus spike-ins from each mouse were homogenized in the cell lysis buffer and proteinase K solution using a tissue homogenizer (FastPrep-24 5G, MP Biomedicals 116005500). Homogenized tissue was incubated at 55 °C overnight. To remove RNA from each tissue samples, RNase A was added with additional spike-ins to whole homogenized tissue. To maintain an accurate representation of all tumours, DNA was extracted, and alcohol precipitated from the entire lung lysate using the Qiagen Gentra PureGene kit as described in the manufacturer’s protocol. More spike-ins were added to the resuspended DNA.Preparation of barcode libraries for sequencingLibraries were prepared by amplifying the barcode region from 32 µg of genomic DNA per mouse. The barcode region of the integrated Lenti-sgRNA/Cre vectors was PCR amplified using primer pairs that bound to the universal Illumina TruSeq adapters and contained dual unique multiplexing tags. We used a single-step PCR amplification of barcode regions, which we found to be a highly reproducible and quantitative method to determine the number of cancer cells in each tumour. We performed eight 100-µl PCR reactions per mouse (4 µg DNA per reaction) using Q5 HF HS 2X Master Mix (NEB M0515) with the PCR program described in Supplementary Table 2.The concentration of amplified barcode product in each PCR was determined by TapeStation (Agilent Technologies). Sets of 20–60 PCRs were pooled at equal molar ratios of barcode product, normalized to the estimated burden of tumours in each mouse lung sample (measured lung mass minus an estimated normal lung mass of between 0.15 and 0.18 g) associated with the PCRs. Pooled PCRs were cleaned up using a two-sided SPRI bead purification. Samples were sequenced on an Illumina NextSeq.Analysis of sequencing dataPaired-end sequencing reads were demultiplexed via unique dual indexes using BCLConvert (v.3.8.2) and adapter sequences were trimmed using CutAdapt (v.4.1). CutAdapt was used in paired-end mode with the following parameters: minimum-length=0, error-rate=0.1, overlap=3. Paired-end alignments were constructed between mate-paired reads and library-specific databases of the expected oligonucleotide spike-in and tumour barcode insert sequences using Bowtie2 (v.2.4.4). These alignments were stringently filtered from downstream analysis if they failed to meet any of several quality criteria, including:No mismatches between the two mate pairs, which fully overlap one another, at any location.No mismatches between the mate-paired reads and expected constant regions of the barcode or spike-in to which they best align.No indels in alignments between mate-paired reads and the barcode or spike-in to which they best align.After alignment, errors in paired-end reads were corrected using a simple greedy clustering algorithm:Reads were dereplicated into read sequence/count tuples, (si, ri).These tuples were reordered from highest to lowest on the basis of their read abundances, (ri) (refs. 6,13,49,63).This list of tuples was traversed from i = 1…N, taking one of the following actions for each tuple (si, ri):If si is not within a Hamming distance of 1 from any sj with j < i, then (si, ri) initiates a new cluster.If sj is within a Hamming distance of 1 from some sj with j < i, then it joins the cluster of sj.The resulting clusters are each considered to represent an error-corrected sequence equal to that of the sequence that founded the cluster with read count equal to the sum of the read counts of the dereplicated reads that are members of the cluster.A second stage of error correction was performed to remove additional errors. Hamming distance D(si, sj) was computed on all pairs of error-corrected sequences. Then, each sequence si (with ri reads) was absorbed into the most abundant sequence sj (with rj > ri reads) if either of the following criteria were met:D(si, sj) ≤ 3D(si, sj) ≤ 5 and rj/ri ≤ 5 or ri ≤ 3.These heuristics were established on the basis of internal control data. After applying both rounds of error correction, there were 0 false positives out of the 18,889,362 reads assigned to spike-in oligonucleotide sequences (which have no degenerate bases) that were not added to the samples. After error correction, a filter was applied to remove sequences that could have originated from cross-contamination: barcodes were compared across samples in the same study, and any exact sequences that were found in more than one library were removed.After error correction and cross-contamination removal, the read counts of each unique barcode were converted to neoplastic cell number by dividing the number of reads of the spike-in oligonucleotide added to the sample before tissue homogenization and lysis at a fixed, known concentration.Removal of mice that did not get sufficient viral titre during transductionAfter the sequence processing, mice were removed if they did not reach a lower bound of total neoplastic cells. Mice were removed if they had fewer than 106 total neoplastic cells. This threshold was chosen using by examining the distribution of total neoplastic cells per mouse across each study. Most mice fell within around two orders of magnitude of each other, and any outliers fell at least an order of magnitude below the rest of the distribution.Calculation of pharmacogenomic interactionsFrom these collections of tumour sizes across paired groups of drug-treated and vehicle-treated mice, the relative tumour number (RTN) metric was computed as previously described73. Namely, shrinkage of inert tumours was estimated by finding the S that matches the median number of tumours larger than a cut-off L in such paired groups after the vehicle-treated tumour sizes are multiplied by S (S < 1 when the drug works to shrink tumours). Subsequently, for each non-inert tumour genotype, the ratio of the number of tumours with this genotype larger than L in the control mice to the number of tumours larger than L × S in the treated mice was computed. The resulting ratio was divided by the same ratio computed for the inert tumours, and the log2(•) of this ratio of ratios was determined. This metric, RTNscore is expected to be greater than 0 for resistant genotypes and less than 0 for sensitive genotypes. For example, RTNscore = 1 corresponds to a 2× change in tumour number (larger than each cut-off) relative to the change in untreated versus treated for oncogene-only tumours, whereas RTNscore = −1 corresponds to a 0.5× change and drug sensitivity.To generate CIs for RTNscore, bootstrap resamplings were made by (1) sampling mice with replacement from the control and therapy arms to match the original group sizes, and (2) sampling tumours (of all sizes) with replacement from each mouse. For each mouse/tumour bootstrap, the RTNscore was recomputed. A genotype was then considered sensitive if the 95th percentile of these bootstrap RTNscore values fell below 0, or resistant if the 5th percentile exceeded 0. We performed this bootstrapping procedure at tumour size cut-offs ranging from L = 300 cells to L = 30,000 cells.RTNscores were also generated comparing anti-PD-1 and anti-CTLA4 combination treatment to anti-PD-1 monotherapy, using the same method as for the drug-treated versus vehicle comparison.Calculation of tumour size percentilesFirst, tumours were pooled across all mice in the vehicle group, and separated into tumours that map to each Lenti-sgRNA/Cre guide. Tumours from Lenti-sgInert/Cre were pooled (sgNT-1, sgNT-2, sgNT-3, sgRosa26-1, sgRosa26-2, sgRosa26-3) to create one pool of sgInert tumours. For this analysis, we used all tumours that had at least 500 neoplastic cells, which was the minimum tumour size we could reliably quantify in this study.For each set of Lenti-sgRNA/Cre tumours in each oncogene–background pair, size percentiles of tumours above the 500 cell cut-off were computed and divided by the same size percentiles for the sgInert tumours in the same context with the same cut-off. Mice and tumours were bootstrapped 200 times and the calculation was repeated each time. A 95% CI from these bootstraps was reported.Animal cohorts and generation of immune-competent Stk11- and/or Keap1-deficient syngeneic NSCLC modelsMice were housed in the Research Animal Support Facility at the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center. All animal studies described here were performed according to protocols approved by the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center IACUC, and according to pre-specified criteria for euthanasia, tumour size limit and animal cohort sample size. Investigators were not blinded to treatment arm allocation.The KL5 and KL2 polyclonal KrasG12C-mutant Stk11-deficient LUAD cell lines were established from autochthonous lung tumours in compound conditional KrasLSL-G12C+/WTStk11/Lkb1Fl/Fl male mice (on a C57Bl/6 genetic background), after lung tumour induction with intranasal instillation of of adenoviral Cre recombinase (University of Iowa Viral Vector Core) as previously described74 and were used to establish subcutaneous allograft tumours in sex-matched (male) syngeneic recipient C57Bl/6 mice.LKR10 and LKR13 KrasG12D-mutant LUAD cells (on a 129/Sv genetic background, previously generated in the laboratory of T. Jacks) were transiently transfected with Keap1 CRISPR–Cas9 KO plasmid (sc-424513-KO-2) or Stk11/Lkb1 CRISPR–Cas9 KO plasmid (sc-423192) from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (LKR10 derivative models) or pSpCas9(BB)-2A-GFP (PX458) plasmid with specific sgRNAs (LKR13 derivative models). The plasmid vectors for CRISPR–Cas9-mediated Keap1 and Stk11/Lkb1 KO were verified by DNA sequencing. The transfected cells were sorted by BD FACSAria (BD Biosciences) for GFP+ into 96-well plates and single-cell-derived colonies were screened for KEAP1 and LKB1 loss by western blotting.In vivo preclinical studies with anti-PD-1 and anti-CTLA4 in syngeneic tumour modelsSix-to-twelve week-old male C57BL/6 mice (for experiments with KL2 and KL5 cell lines) and male 129/Sv mice (for experiments with LKR10 and LKR13-derived isogenic cell lines) were injected subcutaneously with 1.5 × 106 cells of the indicated genotypes in a 100 μl suspension, consisting of 50% Matrigel basement membrane matrix (Corning) and 50% HBSS. Mice bearing subcutaneous tumours with an average tumour volume (TV) ranging from 150 to 250 mm3 (for long-term efficacy studies) or 50 to 100 mm3 (for immune profiling, immune depletion and iNOS chemical inhibition studies) were randomly assigned to receive treatment with (i) anti-PD-1 200 µg (clone 29F.1A12, BioXCell); (ii) anti-CTLA4 200 µg (clone 9H10, BioXCell); (iii) anti-PD-1 + anti-CTLA4; or (iv) corresponding isotype IgG control antibodies (BioXCell; BE0089 and BE0087) by IP injection twice weekly. Mice were monitored daily and TV was calculated three times weekly on the basis of bidirectional caliper tumour measurements, using the formula V = W2L/2. Comparison of average TV across treatment groups was performed at the time that the first mouse in any treatment arm reached end-point (defined as TV ≥ 1,200 mm3 or 1,500 mm3 depending on the individual experiment), but treatment continued in remaining mice to enable comparisons of time to a tumour volume of 1,200 mm3 or greater.For dual anti-PD-1/anti-TIM-3 and anti-PD-1/anti-LAG-3 ICB experiments, mice bearing KL5 allograft tumours (TV 50–100 mm3, day 5 after tumour implantation) were randomized to treatment with (i) anti-PD-1 200 µg (clone 29F.1A12, BioXCell) plus anti-CTLA4 200 µg (clone 9H10, BioXCell); (ii) anti-PD-1 plus anti-TIM-3 200 µg (clone B8.2C12, BioXCell); or (iii) anti-PD-1 plus anti-LAG-3 200 µg (clone C9B7W, BioXCell) twice weekly by IP injection and were monitored as described above.Immune cell depletion and INOS chemical inhibition studiesCD4+ and CD8+ T cell depletion was performed by intraperitoneal administration of 400 μg of anti-CD4 (clone GK1.5, BioXCell) or anti-CD8 (clone 2.43, BioXCell) depleting monoclonal antibodies twice weekly, starting on day 4 after subcutaneous implantation of 1.5 × 106 KK or KL5 tumour cells. Neutrophil depletion and/or CCL2 neutralization was achieved by intraperitoneal administration of 400 µg of anti-Ly6G antibody (clone 1A8, BioXCell) and/or 200 µg of anti-CCL2 antibody (clone 2H5, BioXCell) starting at day −3 before tumour cell injection and followed by administration of 100 µg of anti-Ly6G or 200 µg of anti-CCL2 twice weekly. Inhibition of iNOS was performed by daily IP injection of 200 µg of L-NIL (Cayman Chemicals) diluted in 100 µl of PBS as previously described42. Treatment with anti-PD-1/ anti-CTLA4 commenced on day 5 when mouse cohorts exhibited average tumour volumes of 50–100 mm3 and followed the same schedule as described above.Preclinical experiments with chemo-immunotherapyCohorts of male 129/Sv mice bearing subcutaneous allograft K (LKR13 KrasG12D mutant; Keap1/Stk11 WT) or isogenic KLK (Keap1- and Stk11-deficient, clone 17) allograft tumours were randomly assigned to (chemo) ICI therapy arms at an average tumour volume of around 210 mm3. Chemotherapy consisted of carboplatin 12.5 mg per kg (institutional pharmacy, NDC 61703-339-56) administered by IP injection every 7 days (for a maximum of 4 doses) and paclitaxel 5 mg per kg (NDC 70860-200-50) administered by IP injection twice weekly (for a maximum of 8 doses). Anti-PD-1 (clone RMP1-14, BioXCell; 8 mg per kg) and anti-CTLA4 (clone 9H10, BioXCell; 8 mg per kg) were administered twice weekly by IP injection until the study end-point was reached.Flow cytometryFor studies of immune modulation, treatment with single or dual ICB commenced on day 5 after subcutaneous tumour implantation and followed the same dosing regimen as previously described for the efficacy experiments. Tumour samples were collectd after five doses of single or dual ICB, on day 18. For chemo-immunotherapy experiments with the K and KLK (clone 17) models, mice received a total of three doses of chemotherapy and/or immunotherapy (D1: carboplatin + paclitaxel + ICB); D4 (paclitaxel + ICB); D7 (carboplatin + paclitaxel + ICB), and tumours were collected for FACS-based immune profiling 48 h later. Tumours were immediately processed into 2–4-mm3 pieces and transferred to a gentleMACS Octo Dissociator tube containing a solution with liberase (25 μg ml−1), DNase I type 1 (30 U ml−1) and hyaluronidase (0.01%) in serum-free RPMI-1640 medium and incubated for 45 min at 37 °C. Enzyme reactions were stopped by the addition of cold RPMI-1640 (10% FBS) and suspensions were dispersed through a 70-μm cell strainer twice. After red blood cell lysis (using RBC lysis buffer, Biolegend), single-cell suspensions (around 1 × 106 cells in 50 μl total volume) were incubated with FcR-blocking reagent rat anti-mouse CD16/32 (2.4G2, BD Biosciences) for 15 min on ice. For extracellular staining, cells were stained with a mixture of conjugated antibodies in FACS buffer, including Ghost Dye Violet 510 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 1 h at room temperature in the dark. For intracellular cytokine and transcription factor staining, single-cell suspensions were fixed and permeabilized using the eBioescience FoxP3/Transcription Factor Staining kit (Life Technologies) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Fluorochrome-conjugated monoclonal antibodies were purchased from Biolegend: Pacific Blue-anti-CD45 (30-F11), PE/Dazzle 594 anti-CD3 (17A2), APC/Cy7–anti-CD4 (RM4-5), PE/Cy7–anti-CD8 (53-6.7), APC–anti-T-bet (4B10), PE–anti-ICOS (7E.17G9), BV711–anti-CD44 (IM7), BV605–anti-PD-1 (29F.1A12), BV711–anti-Gr-1 (RB6-8C5), BV785–anti-CD11c (N418), BV650–anti-CD11b (M1/70), PE/Cy7–anti-I-A/I-E (MHC class II, M5/114.15.2), BV605–anti-Ly6C (HK1.4), PerCP/Cy5.5–anti-Ly6G (1A8); from BD Biosciences: BUV395–anti-CD25 (PC61), BV605–anti-PD-1 (RMP1-30); from Life Technologies: PerCP–Cy5.5–anti-FOXP3 (FJK-16s); from Invitrogen PE–anti-iNOS (CXNFT); and from Tonbo Bioscience FITC–anti-CD62L (MEL-14), APC–anti-F4/80 (BM8.1). Flow cytometry data were acquired on an LSR Fortessa flow cytometer (BD Biosciences) and were analysed using FlowJo v.10.8.1 software (BD Biosciences).scRNA-seqSingle-cell isolation, library preparation and sequencingscRNA-seq of all samples was conducted on the 10x Chromium system (10x Genomics), in collaboration with the MD Anderson Advanced Technology Genomics Core facility. Tumours derived from syngeneic K, KK and KLK LKR13 mouse models were collected when the tumour volume reached 500–700 mm3. Whole tumours were processed and dissociated in a solution containing collagenase A, hyaluronidase, dispase and DNase I. Cell suspensions were strained through a 70-μm cell strainer, submitted to RBC lysis and resuspended in PBS with 0.04% BSA. After viability assessment, isolated cells were submitted to single-cell capture, barcoding and library preparation, following the 10x Genomics Single Cell Chromium 5’ V2 protocols. Pooled samples underwent sequencing with the NovaSeq6000 sequencer, performed at the ATGC core at the MD Anderson Cancer Center.scRNA-seq data analysisRaw scRNA-seq data were preprocessed (demultiplex cellular barcodes, read alignment and generation of gene count matrix) using the Cell Ranger Single Cell pipeline provided by 10x Genomics, using the mouse reference transcriptome GRCm38 (mm10). Data merging, filtering, doublet removal, batch-effect evaluation and data normalization were performed following standard protocols as previously described75. The Seurat R package (v.4.3) was used to analyse the normalized gene–cell matrix and Harmony (v.0.1.1) was applied for batch-effect correction. Each cluster was determined according to highly variable genes identified applying the FindClusters Seurat function and validated with SingleR (v.2.2.0). Dimensionality reduction and two-dimensional visualization of cell clusters was performed using uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP) with the Seurat function RunUMAP. Differentially expressed genes were identified with the FindMarkers function. Gene signature scores were obtained with AddModuleScore function.Graphical illustrationsGraphical elements used to illustrate experimental design schemes were created with BioRender.com, licensed by the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center.Reporting summaryFurther information on research design is available in the Nature Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article. End-points and statistical analysisThe primary end-points were progression-free survival (PFS), evaluated by blinded independent central review (BICR) per RECIST v.1.1, and overall survival (OS) for DCT versus CT. PFS was defined as the time from random assignment to objective PD or death from any cause in the absence of progression and OS as the time from random assignment to death from any cause. Key alpha-controlled secondary end-points were PFS and OS for TDCT versus CT.A hierarchical multiple testing procedure with a gatekeeping strategy was used across the primary end-points and alpha-controlled secondary end-points. First, 1% alpha and 4% alpha were allocated to PFS and OS, respectively, for the DCT versus CT comparison. Positivity for either primary end-point enabled alpha recycling to the key secondary PFS and OS end-points (TDCT versus CT). If either of the key secondary PFS or OS end-points was met, the alpha could be recycled to the other key secondary end-point. The primary and key secondary PFS and OS analyses were performed using a stratified log-rank test adjusted for the stratification variables of tumour PD-L1 expression, disease stage and histology, with HRs and 95% CIs estimated using a stratified Cox proportional hazards model. ORR was analysed using a logistic regression model, adjusted for the same factors as the primary end-points, and odds ratios and 95% CIs calculated. The Kaplan–Meier method was used to calculate median OS, PFS and DoR. Efficacy data were analysed in the biomarker-evaluable nsNSCLC population. Analysis of the ICON NSCLC cohortTumour samples from patients enrolled in the ICON cohort56 with nsNSCLC histology, no prior neoadjuvant chemotherapy and available transcriptional profiling data were considered eligible (n = 57). Raw RNA-seq data underwent normalization and transformation using the vsd function from DESeq2. Z-scores and average gene expression data were used for signature-based evaluation of immune cell subsets. TH1 levels and overall immune infiltrate (ImmuneScore) were estimated as gene signatures using XCell57 and plotted according to the presence of STK11 and/or KEAP1 somatic mutations or functional status using previously validated signatures for LKB1 deficiency58 or NRF2 transcriptional activation8. Neutrophil, macrophage and CD8+ T cell signature data were assessed with MCPCounter to obtain ratios per sample. All analyses were performed using Python v3.9 and R v.4.3.1. Analysis of the TCGA PanCancer Atlas lung adenocarcinoma datasetPaired WES, RNA-seq and clinical data from patients with LUAD from the TCGA PanCancer Atlas cohort were downloaded from the cBioPortal for Cancer Genomics repository59. Immune cell subsets were estimated using aggregated data from TIMER2.060, which provides standardized output from six different immune estimation methods. Neutrophil, macrophage and CD8+ T cell signature data were assessed with MCPCounter to obtain ratios per sample. QuanTIseq was used to compare T cell and nonregulatory CD4 levels across mutation groups. Overall immune infiltrate (ImmuneScore) and TH1 levels were estimated as gene signatures using XCell57. Comparisons across groups were performed using the Kruskal–Wallis H test. Analyses were performed using R v.4.0.3. Library design and constructionWe established a library of 1,813 sgRNAs targeting 162 genes, with a focus on genes with loss-of-function mutations or deletions in cancer. In addition, we included known essential genes, immune resistance genes and immune sensitizing genes, to assess and validate the in vivo screening platform. Eleven per cent of the sgRNAs included in the library represented non-targeting controls. sgRNA oligos were cloned into a lentiCRISPR v2 plasmid61, using Gibson assembly. Data analysisGenomic DNA isolation and sequencing were performed as previously described62. To normalize the raw counts of sgRNA guides in each sample, a sample-specific size factor was determined by the ratio of the median count of the non-targeting control guides to the one of the plasmid pool. The raw counts were scaled by multiplying the sample-specific size factors for each sample and adding one to all the values. The log2-transformed fold change for each sgRNA in each perturbed arm was calculated using the control arm as a reference and averaged over biological replicates. The gene-level log2-transformed fold change was computed by averaging the sgRNAs targeting the same gene. Raw sgRNA counts were also used as input into MAGeCK to call significantly enriched and depleted genes using the MAGeCK Python package v.0.5.763,64. The median ratio of non-targeting sgRNAs was chosen as the normalization method when running MAGeCK. Gene-level score matrices included log2-transformed fold change, FDR and P values. Design and generation of Lenti-sgRNA/Cre vectorsWe generated lentiviral vectors encoding Cre (expressed from a PGK promoter65) and an sgRNA (expressed from a human U6 promoter) targeting each of the following 22 genes, which are known or putative tumour suppressors that are recurrently mutated in LUAD (or pan-carcinoma) and represent diverse cancer pathways66,67: Apc, Arid2, Atm, Atrx, Brca2, Cdkn2a, Cmtr2, Keap1, Kmt2d, Mga, Nf1, Pten, Ptprd, Rb1, Rbm10, Rnf43, Setd2, Smad4, Stag2, Stk11, Trp53 and Tsc1. Vectors encoding ‘inert’ sgRNAs were also generated: sgRosa26-1, sgRosa26-2, sgRosa26-3, sgNT-1, sgNT-2 and sgNT-3.sgRNAs were designed and selected as follows. First, all possible 20-bp sgRNAs (using an NGG PAM) targeting each gene of interest were identified and scored for predicted on-target cutting efficiency using an available sgRNA design/scoring algorithm68. For each TSG, we then selected the sgRNA predicted to be the most likely to produce null alleles: preference was given to sgRNAs that were previously validated in vivo32,69,70, had the highest predicted on-target cutting efficiencies, targeted exons conserved in all known splice isoforms (ENSEMBL), targeted splice acceptor/splice donor sites, were positioned earliest in the gene coding region, occurred upstream of or within annotated functional domains (InterPro; UniProt), and occurred upstream of or at known recurrent mutation sites in human LUAD. The sgRNA sequences for each target are listed in Supplementary Table 1.To generate Lenti-sgRNA/Cre vectors containing each sgRNA, a double-stranded DNA fragment (IDT gBlock) containing a U6-sgRNA-tracrRNA cassette flanked by restriction sites (AscI and SbfI) was synthesized and digested by AscI and SbfI. This digested DNA fragment was then cloned into an AscI/SbfI-digested parental lentivector encoding Cre to produce each circularized Lenti-sgRNA/Cre vector. Analysis of sequencing dataPaired-end sequencing reads were demultiplexed via unique dual indexes using BCLConvert (v.3.8.2) and adapter sequences were trimmed using CutAdapt (v.4.1). CutAdapt was used in paired-end mode with the following parameters: minimum-length=0, error-rate=0.1, overlap=3. Paired-end alignments were constructed between mate-paired reads and library-specific databases of the expected oligonucleotide spike-in and tumour barcode insert sequences using Bowtie2 (v.2.4.4). These alignments were stringently filtered from downstream analysis if they failed to meet any of several quality criteria, including:No mismatches between the two mate pairs, which fully overlap one another, at any location.No mismatches between the mate-paired reads and expected constant regions of the barcode or spike-in to which they best align.No indels in alignments between mate-paired reads and the barcode or spike-in to which they best align.After alignment, errors in paired-end reads were corrected using a simple greedy clustering algorithm:Reads were dereplicated into read sequence/count tuples, (si, ri).These tuples were reordered from highest to lowest on the basis of their read abundances, (ri) (refs. 6,13,49,63).This list of tuples was traversed from i = 1…N, taking one of the following actions for each tuple (si, ri):If si is not within a Hamming distance of 1 from any sj with j < i, then (si, ri) initiates a new cluster.If sj is within a Hamming distance of 1 from some sj with j < i, then it joins the cluster of sj.The resulting clusters are each considered to represent an error-corrected sequence equal to that of the sequence that founded the cluster with read count equal to the sum of the read counts of the dereplicated reads that are members of the cluster.A second stage of error correction was performed to remove additional errors. Hamming distance D(si, sj) was computed on all pairs of error-corrected sequences. Then, each sequence si (with ri reads) was absorbed into the most abundant sequence sj (with rj > ri reads) if either of the following criteria were met:D(si, sj) ≤ 3D(si, sj) ≤ 5 and rj/ri ≤ 5 or ri ≤ 3.These heuristics were established on the basis of internal control data. After applying both rounds of error correction, there were 0 false positives out of the 18,889,362 reads assigned to spike-in oligonucleotide sequences (which have no degenerate bases) that were not added to the samples. After error correction, a filter was applied to remove sequences that could have originated from cross-contamination: barcodes were compared across samples in the same study, and any exact sequences that were found in more than one library were removed.After error correction and cross-contamination removal, the read counts of each unique barcode were converted to neoplastic cell number by dividing the number of reads of the spike-in oligonucleotide added to the sample before tissue homogenization and lysis at a fixed, known concentration. scRNA-seq data analysisRaw scRNA-seq data were preprocessed (demultiplex cellular barcodes, read alignment and generation of gene count matrix) using the Cell Ranger Single Cell pipeline provided by 10x Genomics, using the mouse reference transcriptome GRCm38 (mm10). Data merging, filtering, doublet removal, batch-effect evaluation and data normalization were performed following standard protocols as previously described75. The Seurat R package (v.4.3) was used to analyse the normalized gene–cell matrix and Harmony (v.0.1.1) was applied for batch-effect correction. Each cluster was determined according to highly variable genes identified applying the FindClusters Seurat function and validated with SingleR (v.2.2.0). Dimensionality reduction and two-dimensional visualization of cell clusters was performed using uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP) with the Seurat function RunUMAP. Differentially expressed genes were identified with the FindMarkers function. Gene signature scores were obtained with AddModuleScore function. Online contentAny methods, additional references, Nature Portfolio reporting summaries, source data, extended data, supplementary information, acknowledgements, peer review information; details of author contributions and competing interests; and statements of data and code availability are available at 10.1038/s41586-024-07943-7.