DiscussionThis study aligned with previous reports6,8 of versican accumulation in vascular lesions of PAH and illustrated the two- and three-dimensional distribution of versican isoforms, neoepitopes, and their binding partners in the pulmonary vascular tree. ISH confirmed the expression of isoforms containing GAGα and GAGβ within pulmonary vascular lesions. Although GAGβ was seemingly more abundant within remodeled vessels of PAH lungs compared to GAGα, the observation could potentially also result from differential antibody affinity or epitope access. However, our methodologies could not decipher the specific origins of those domains. Since V2 is not expected in lung tissue, 14 it is likely that full-length V0 is the source for GAGα in remodeled vessels. However, ISH and immunostaining cannot determine whether the GAGβ is within V0 or V1.The N- and C-terminal ends of versican did not consistently colocalize, suggesting potential motility of the generated fragments following proteolytic fragmentation of versican. In line with this possibility, neoepitopes DPEAAE and ARRGQF were identified within the vascular lesions, affirming ADAMTS-mediated cleavage of V0 and/or V1 in PAH. DPEAAE staining was strongly associated with the vascular endothelium, where versican G3 was also identified in our material. In contrast, endothelial staining of the other epitope created by the same cleavage, ARRGQF, was not observed. The DPEAAE and ARRGQF staining is potentially related to differential G1 and G3 staining, where G1 most often was located in the tunica media. In addition to differential fragment redistribution after E441-A442 cleavage, further cleavage of the G1-DPEAAE and/or ARRGQF-G3 fragments or interacting partners that could facilitate mobility or alter staining intensity, are also plausible explanations for the patterns observed.Recent studies highlighted the potential of versikine as a damage-associated molecular pattern that regulates activity of dendritic cells and T-cell infiltration in a context dependent manner.28,40 Interestingly, in remodeled pulmonary arteries of PAH patients, the predominant CD45+ cells are lymphocytes, but activated dendritic cells are also present. 41 A possible impact of versikine on the inflammatory profile of remodeled arteries and on pulmonary arterial endothelium remains to be elucidated.Ongoing enzymatic cleavage concurs with previous findings 8 of circulating G3 in plasma from patients with PAH. We confirmed the finding of a higher concentration of versican G3 in IPAH/HPAH patient plasma using ELISA in two separate cohorts from the Swedish LCPR biobank. For plasma samples from Cohort I and II, the aim was to select cohorts that matched the disease severity in the existing tissue cohort to the extent possible, with variance in the PAH-specific treatment. However, hemodynamic and clinical data revealed that plasma Cohort I was markedly healthier with longer 6-minute walk test distances, lower functional class, and lower PVR. It could very well be that the clinical parameters of the plasma cohorts reflect an earlier morphological stage of PAH vascular remodeling, although tissue samples to support this conclusion is lacking. We believe that the milder phenotype seen in plasma Cohort I and II strengthens our conclusion that versican G3 is a possible circulating marker for pulmonary vascular remodeling in PAH. However, during our measurements, we observed intra-assay variability that may have arisen from sample handling, serum-specific matrix effect, and assay variability itself. Additionally, systemically secreted G3 from other organs could affect the result of our analysis. Our interpretation of the relationship between circulating versican G3 and PAH disease severity requires additional studies with larger cohorts.HA was found in the neointima of PAH lesions, concordant with an elevated concentration in patient plasma as well as in vascular lesions, as previously reported. 17 In this study, we further demonstrated that HA colocalized with versican G3, possibly indicating the existence of non-cleaved versican core protein, and DPEAAE. Versican-HA complex has been shown to be essential for the proliferation and migration of vascular smooth muscle cells. 21 As Steffes and colleagues showed, it is likely that dysregulated proliferation of vascular smooth muscle cells is a major factor in neointima formation, 42 which in turn is predicted to reduce the lumenal diameter and, as such, increase PVR. The relationship between versican and the synthetic phenotype of PASMCs was reported via single-cell transcriptomics, highlighting the modulatory role of versican in this setting. 9 The osmotic properties of the HA-versican complex are likely to add to this effect but are consistently underestimated in paraffin sections due to tissue dehydration. Interestingly, attempts to inhibit HA synthesis in chronic diseases have been theorized, and to some extent tested, with the use of hymecromone (4-methylumbelliferone), a drug used to treat biliary dyskinesia. 43 To our knowledge, similar trials in the PAH setting have not yet been undertaken.Tenascin-C was found in the neointima and also along the endothelium of some, but not all, vascular lesions. Clear positive staining of tenascin-C was, however, also identified along the endothelium of thin-walled vessels associated with intimal and occlusive lesions as well as with plexiform lesions.In the present study, we have 3-dimensionally reconstructed thin-walled vessels that were associated with vascular occlusions and plexiform lesions. We showed that these thin-walled vessels, to a large extent, were associated with the bronchial microcirculation. These vessels are possibly the result of angiogenesis. In line with this, thin-walled vessels were positive for tenascin-C, a regulator of angiogenesis during wound healing, 44 but invariably negative for versican G3 or versican neoepitopes. Tenascin-C has previously been reported to be elevated in the peripheral circulation of patients.18,19 These results may imply that when elevated tenascin-C concentrations are detected in plasma, a manifest pulmonary vasculopathy with collateral vessels and systemic connections may have developed. Possibly, elevated versican G3 may precede elevated tenascin-C in patient plasma, which could be tested in the future. Animal models, such as the prolonged Sugen5416/hypoxia rat model, shown to produce shunt-type plexiform lesions,34,45 could possibly be used to test this along the PAH timeline. The contribution of versican and tenascin-C from other tissues must also be considered.In conclusion, versican was expressed and localized within vascular lesions of PAH, where it also underwent proteolytic cleavage. Versican and G1/DPEAAE-containing fragments co-localized with HA, which was abundant in all neointimas observed. Versican G3 is strengthened as a potential biomarker for PAH.