1IntroductionInflammatory demyelinating diseases (IDDs) of the central nervous system (CNS) are immune-mediated disorders that lead to the destruction of myelin, either primarily [multiple sclerosis (MS) and myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein-antibody-associated disease (MOGAD)] or secondarily [neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder (NMOSD)]. There is a variable degree of axonal injury and loss, which is the ultimate substrate of disability (1, 2). The development and pathogenesis of IDDs are complicated immune mechanisms, presumably involving both innate and adaptive immunity, reflecting defects in autoimmune tolerance mechanisms. Likewise, the immunobiology of injury and repair is multifactorial and influenced by genetic and environmental factors. Remyelination may protect against axonal degeneration by oligodendrocyte precursor cell (OPC) proliferation and maturation to oligodendrocytes (OLs) in the case of actual OL loss to a variable degree (3). OLs have high metabolic requirements to maintain myelin synthesis and metabolic support of axons (3). The most well-defined IDDs are multiple sclerosis (MS), widely believed to be T-cell-mediated, and NMOSD and MOGAD, both of which are believed to be antibody-mediated.Clusters of chronic conditions and comorbidities may occur in IDDs and are an area of current interest (4–12). Comorbidity refers to the burden caused by the presence and severity of any distinct additional entity other than the specific index disease and may result from similar predisposing genetic or environmental factors (13) or from treatment of IDDs (14, 15). For instance, corticosteroids can precipitate the onset of diabetes and hyperglycemia, while other certain immunosuppressive drugs are linked to an increased risk of cardiovascular disease (4). The co-occurrence of two or more chronic conditions, i.e., so-called multimorbidity, may be present even at the time of diagnosis (4).In IDDs, comorbidity may contribute to remyelination failure and neuronal injury and adversely affect a broad range of outcomes, including the risk of relapse, diminished quality of life (QoL), and long-term disability.Multimorbidity is a growing concern, with an increase in the prevalence of chronic somatic conditions as well as mental disorders, in part reflecting an aging population (10–12, 16, 17). Many factors such as lifestyle and socioeconomic status may lead to the onset of multimorbidity at a younger age (13). Emerging evidence underscores a high prevalence of comorbidity, i.e., vascular comorbidities and related risk factors in patients with multiple sclerosis (18), exemplified by type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), which is a highly prevalent disorder worldwide. Patients with T2DM are at high risk for microvascular complications, owing to hyperglycemia and insulin resistance (metabolic syndrome) (19). Oral antidiabetic drugs such as metformin and pioglitazone may beneficially impact MS disease progression by reducing inflammatory mediators such as interferon-γ, interleukin (IL)-6, and TNF-alpha (20). T2DM may influence brain function and may cause brain insulin resistance, neuroinflammation including microglia activation, blood–brain barrier (BBB) impairment, and mitochondrial dysfunction, resulting in neuronal metabolic defects and neuronal cell death (21). The most common comorbidities in patients with NMOSD are hypertension and cardiovascular disease (4, 22), although uniquely in NMOSD, other autoimmune conditions, such as systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, Sjögren’s syndrome, and autoimmune encephalitis, may occur as concurrent comorbid diseases because of defective B-cell development checkpoints (5, 6). MOGAD has only recently been recognized and may be regarded as a relatively rare disorder (23), so the pattern of comorbidity has not yet been elucidated; however, anti-N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor encephalitis (anti-NMDAR encephalitis) and autoimmune thyroid disorders have been reported to occur (7).Investigations of the impact of comorbidities on clinical outcomes of IDD have only been conducted to a limited extent. Comorbid conditions can be associated with a prolonged interval between the disease onset and its subsequent diagnosis. An increase in the frequency of relapses has been observed in NMOSD patients with comorbidities compared to NMOSD patients without comorbidities, with severe motor episodes and severe optic neuritis (ON) (15). Multifocal CNS lesions as a presenting symptom are more prevalent in patients with comorbidities compared to those without. Moreover, comorbidity can be indicative of reduced treatment responsiveness, heightened disability, and an elevated mortality rate (15, 24).However, the current knowledge is mainly based on retrospective and cross-sectional studies with a small number of patients. A prospective and longitudinal study with an evaluation of the interaction between clinical and paraclinical parameters of comorbidity of subjects with MS, NMOSD, and MOGAD will be a timely effort.1.1Advancing data collection and protocols for comorbidity analysis and managementThe high occurrence of comorbidities suggests screening for concomitant medical conditions as a routine part of patient care, as comorbidities may influence the clinical features, prognosis, and treatment outcomes. So far unexplored, the comorbidity and certain clusters of chronic conditions may have a negative impact on the levels of proinflammatory and neurodegenerative mediators, and they may negatively influence disease progression. Such knowledge will be important for optimizing treatment strategies and thereby hopefully improve QoL. Comorbidities may vary depending on age, sex, ethnicity, geographic region, socioeconomic composition, and healthcare system, highlighting the importance of a multicenter design. Furthermore, analytical pipelines for the determination of molecular and cellular markers as well as downstream algorithm-based (integrative) data analysis have been established and are in the process of validation. This multicentric study will analyze data from different sets of patients without or with one or more comorbidities, with follow-up visits. We aim to determine the levels of inflammatory and neurodegenerative mediators in patients with MS, NMOSD, and MOGAD, both with and without comorbidities, and evaluate whether changes may affect disease outcomes. Furthermore, we aim to assess whether comorbidity influences optical coherence tomography (OCT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) parameters and its association with clinical outcomes.