14DiscussionAfter EMA approval, lecanemab could be granted Early Market Authorization in France and be used in clinical practice in 2025 . However, transitioning from clinical trials to real-world clinical practice can result in higher adverse events and lower efficacy . To ensure optimal patient outcomes in managing AD, French clinicians should follow standardized approaches to patient selection and administration of lecanemab. These recommendations are aligned with the EMA marketing authorization, i.e. restricted prescription to non-carriers or heterozygous carriers of the ε4 variant of the APOE gene, and to individuals not taking anticoagulants. They do not replace regulatory prescribing information but offer practical information for healthcare professionals in charge of early AD patients.These recommendations primarily emphasize the need for a comprehensive risk-benefit ratio assessment involving clinical, neuropsychological, biological, genetic, and imaging information that should be discussed in multidisciplinary consultation meetings and communicated to the patient and their care partner using appropriate language to facilitate shared decision-making.The recommendations for lecanemab are mainly based on its pivotal trial, similar to the American AUR and FDA prescribing information. However, some recommendations differ, (Table 3). We recommend that non-amnestic common AD phenotypes, such as logopenic variant primary progressive aphasia and posterior cortical atrophy, should not be excluded if AD biomarkers are positive. This is based on assessing AD as the likely primary pathology responsible for the patient's phenotype . Conversely, the CLARITY-AD protocol focuses on the amnestic variant, while the US AUR and prescribing information recommend additional information to non-amnestic patients. We recommend refraining from treating APOE4 homozygotes due to an unfavorable risk-benefit ratio, aligned with the EMA marketing authorization. Conversely, the US AUR and prescribing information advise a careful shared decision-making process. We recommend not treating patients on anticoagulants or with comorbid cerebrovascular disease due to an unfavorable risk-benefit ratio, aligned with the EMA marketing authorization. This aligns with the US AUR but contradicts the FDA's prescribing information, which advises caution. We recommend extending cerebrovascular disease exclusion criteria to individuals fulfilling the Boston v1.5 criteria for probable CAA due to the risk of amyloid-related ICH. Instead of contra-indicating thrombolytics for stroke like the US AUR, we recommend assessing the hemorrhagic risk with a rapid brain MRI when facing emergencies requiring thrombolytic agents or anticoagulants . Due to the increased predictive value of cSS for amyloid-related ICH, we recommend discontinuing lecanemab treatment upon any occurrence of cSS until further evidence emerges. This differs from the US AUR guidelines, which allow no baseline cSS and require more than one cSS for permanent discontinuation.Table 3Appropriate and inappropriate uses of lecanemab in the CLARITY-AD trial and in clinical practice according to American  and French recommendations.Table 3:CriteriaCLARITY-AD criteriaAmerican recommendationsFrench recommendationsRecommended3.1 Cognitive severityMMSE score ≥ 22 and ≤ 30 at screening and baseline visitsScore compatible with early AD: MMSE 22–30 or another cognitive test-MMSE ≥ 22, threshold can be discussed in individuals with low education or language abilities-Autonomy score compatible with early AD can be used in these special situations4.1 Clinical phenotypeMemory impairment (WMS IV - LM II < 1 SD)Objective impairment in one or more cognitive domains-Amnestic (typical) AD-Other non-amnestic common AD phenotypes (logopenic variant primary progressive aphasia or posterior cortical atrophy)4.1 BiomarkersPositive biomarker for amyloid pathology (amyloid PET: visual reading or CSF: total tau/Aβ42 ratio)Positive amyloid PET or CSF studies indicative of AD-Positive blood biomarker using double threshold (ptau217)-CSF A+/T+-Positive amyloid PET (if inconclusive CSF biomarkers or LP contraindication)6.1 & 6.2 Age50–90Physician judgement used for patients outside the 50–90 years age range-No exclusion only based on chronological age-Extreme ages discussed in multidisciplinary meetings-Need for frailty and standardized geriatric assessment for older individualsNot recommended5.1 APOE4 statusUsed for subgroup analysis only (efficacy and safety)APOE genotyping recommended to guide risk discussion and MRI monitoring (supplementary brain MRI scan at week 52)-Need to determine APOE4 status for patient information-Lecanemab not recommended for APOE4 homozygotes-Supplementary MRI monitoring for ARIA for APOE4 heterozygotess10 Antithrombotic agentsAnticoagulant treatment optimized and on a stable dose for 4 weeks-Patients on anticoagulants should not receive lecanemab-tPA should not be administered to individuals on lecanemab-Lecanemab not recommended for patients on anticoagulants-No absolute contraindication for tPA but need to perform rapid brain MRI to exclude ARIA before use of tPA8 Brain MRI-Brain MRI at screening visit-More than 4 microhemorrhages-A single macrohemorrhage >10 mm-An area of superficial siderosis-Evidence of vasogenic edema-Multiple lacunar-infarcts or stroke involving a major vascular territory-Severe small vessel-Other major intracranial pathology-Brain MRI within 6 months before lecanemab administration-More than 4 microhemorrhages-A single macrohemorrhage >10 mm-An area of superficial siderosis-Evidence of vasogenic edema-More than 2 lacunar infarcts-Stroke involving a major vascular territory-Severe subcortical hyperintensities (Fazekas 3)-Evidence of ABRA or CAA-ri-Other major intracranial pathology that may cause cognitive decline-Brain MRI within 6 months before lecanemab administration-More than 4 microhemorrhages (lobar and/or deep)-More than 1 lobar microhemorrhage (probable CAA)-A single macrohemorrhage >10 mm-An area of superficial siderosis-Evidence of vasogenic edema-Multiple lacunar infarcts-Severe white matter hyperintensities (Fazekas score of 3)-Stroke involving a major vascular territory must be evaluated on a case-by-case basis-Other major intracranial pathology that may cause primarily cognitive decline-Unruptured intracranial vascular malformations need to be discussed in multidisciplinary meetingsTo be discussed7.1 Neurological comorbiditiesAny neurological condition that may be contributing to cognitive impairment-Any neurologic condition that may be contributing to the cognitive impairment - Any non-AD MCI or dementiaMultidisciplinary meetings should review comorbid conditions and address the following questions to assess the risk-benefit ratio:1)Does the comorbid condition primarily and significantly affect cognition and function despite positive biomarkers?2)Will the comorbid condition likely interfere with the expected safety, magnitude, and temporality of lecanemab's efficacy, thereby impacting its risk-benefit ratio?3)Will the comorbid condition likely affect treatment compliance and monitoring?7.1 Psychiatric comorbiditiesAny psychiatric diagnosis or symptoms that could interfere with study procedures-Any psychiatric condition that may be contributing to the cognitive impairment-Patient with mental illness unable to comply with management requirements7.1 Other medical comorbiditiesAny medical conditions not stable-Any medical that may be contributing to the cognitive impairment-Unstable medical conditionsAbbreviations: ABRA, Amyloid Beta-Related Angiitis; AD, Alzheimer's Disease; CAA-ri, Cerebral Amyloid Angiopathy-related inflammation; CSF, CerebroSpinal Fluid; MMSE, MiniMental State Examination; PET, Positron Emission Tomography; WMS, Wechsler Memory Scale.We recommend an additional early safety MRI before the 3rd infusion, considering the early occurrence of ARIA in the CLARITY-AD trial, and to further customize MRI monitoring according to the APOE4 status. Careful selection of the MRI sequence for detecting hemorrhagic abnormalities is necessary, preferably using long TE GRE-T2* sequences as long as equivalence between SWI and long TE GRE-T2* sequences has not been established. It is recommended to establish a clinical care pathway with protocols for patients with ARIA, with trained physicians and radiologists with expertise in neurological emergency and intensive care. Patients on lecanemab should receive emergency cards.We propose an original approach to integrating AD plasma biomarkers for determining eligibility for lecanemab. We anticipate that this strategy will become standard practice, enhancing patient care by reducing the need for invasive lumbar punctures and their associated costs. Although recent American Appropriate Use Recommendations offer guidance on blood biomarkers for assessing amyloid pathology related to disease-modifying therapy , they lack specific cutoffs and a double-threshold approach, and do not differentiate between AD phenotypes, only mentioning AD as a suspected cause of cognitive impairment. Our recommendations address these gaps by specifying common AD phenotypes, implementing a double threshold with at least 97.5 % specificity, and validating biomarkers results through multidisciplinary discussions, thereby ensuring their effective use in clinical practice.We finally suggest a discontinuation protocol, which aims to facilitate long-term use of lecanemab in the lack of available data, while balancing risk-benefit and treatment burden. This protocol should be updated as additional evidence are available in the future.As lecanemab gains popularity in the US and becomes covered by Medicare, more data from registries is expected to emerge, allowing for a more precise evaluation of the drug's risk-benefit ratio. Refining the ARIA risk by testing the impact of comorbidities and medications, as well as additional dimensions of cerebrovascular diseases (e.g., CAA features), will be crucial. Establishing equivalence between microhemorrhage thresholds across MR sequences will also help SWI sequences be used in clinical routine to assess and monitor patients safely on anti-amyloid immunotherapies. Further studies are needed to understand the temporality of ARIA occurrence and the long-term efficacy of lecanemab, including the effect of treatment discontinuation.Future development of this drug class is expected to include donanemab. However, differences in pharmacodynamics with lecanemab and the use of more complex biomarker investigations in the donanemab phase 3 clinical trial will make it difficult to compare to current guidelines. Therefore, establishing a specific AUR will be necessary.Implementing lecanemab in the French healthcare system is challenging due to its cost and therapeutic index . If the treatment is approved, it will likely have limited accessibility and be restricted to hospital use. This aligns with the need for a multidisciplinary consultation meeting before initiation, as highlighted in these recommendations. However, the number of eligible patients for lecanemab may exceed the current access capabilities for clinical, biomarker assessment, infusion, and MRI monitoring . The primary factor contributing to the inequity of treatment access will be limited access to specialized diagnosis and infusion centers. Gradually increasing the number of specialized centers will help to reduce these inequities. Additionally, the development of subcutaneous formulations, the emergence of anti-amyloid immunotherapies or titration protocols with better safety profiles, as well as plasma biomarkers, may facilitate the eligibility assessment and monitoring of these drugs, enlarge their indications, and reduce inequities.As per the EMA Marketing Authorization, a post-authorization safety study must be carried out to characterize ARIA-E and ARIA-H further and assess the effectiveness of the risk minimization measures through an EU-wide registry study with patients treated with lecanemab. This initiative will be similar to the ALZ-NET initiative in the US.Finally, as data from real-world clinical practice, open-label extension, and other clinical trials keep accumulating, we anticipate these recommendations should be updated regularly. 15ConclusionLecanemab treatment requires a comprehensive evaluation of the risk-benefit ratio that should take place in multidisciplinary meetings. In line with the EMA Marketing Authorization, patients with unfavorable risk-benefit profiles (APOE4 homozygotes, patients on anticoagulants) should not receive lecanemab treatment. We also propose expanding this category to individuals with comorbid probable CAA due to their high risk of amyloid-related ICH until further data become available. We recommend MRI monitoring tailored to APOE status and evidence-based temporality of ARIA. Emergency physicians, AD specialists, and radiologists should receive specific training for ARIA management, and early MRI monitoring for ARIA should be performed. Access to lecanemab will require a personalized biological and genetic diagnosis of AD, which is currently not necessary in most cases. To facilitate this implementation, we propose incorporating plasma biomarkers into the eligibility assessment under specific conditions. We also suggest a discontinuation protocol to facilitate long-term use of the treatment. Therefore, in the event of lecanemab approval, the French healthcare system will have to swiftly adapt to these new diagnostic procedures and treatment delivery to ensure equal access for all individuals on the national territory. This will require strengthening collaborations between primary care practitioners and the various levels of Memory Clinics.