Background/AimOcrelizumab, a CD20-targeting monoclonal antibody, is used for treatment of multiple sclerosis. The aim of this study was to explore the utility of peripheral blood cell subsets in prediction of treatment response to ocrelizumab in relapsing remitting multiple sclerosis (RRMS). IntroductionMultiple sclerosis (MS) is a common autoimmune demyelinating disease of the central nervous system ultimately inducing permanent brain atrophy and neurological disability (1). Monoclonal antibodies targeting the CD20 molecule have proven effective in both relapsing remitting (RRMS) and primary progressive forms of MS through depletion of B-cells in peripheral blood and brain. The therapeutic use of ocrelizumab, a humanized monoclonal antibody targeting the CD20 molecule, has been approved in both RRMS and primary progressive forms (2).Previous studies have shown that ocrelizumab not only suppresses effector B-cells but also modulates non-B-cell subpopulations to adopt a more tolerogenic status, and repopulates regulatory cells (3,4). Nevertheless, around 30% of patients with RRMS under ocrelizumab treatment show disease activity through inflammatory lesions on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), disability worsening, and relapses (5). Therefore, studies exploring the clinical and immunological variables associated with treatment efficacy of ocrelizumab are required, especially for active forms of MS.In a previous study, we showed that ocrelizumab-treated patients with RRMS with a less than 30% reduction in baseline cerebrospinal fluid neurofilament light chain levels were more likely to show evidence of disease activity (EDA) in a 24-month follow-up period (6). In other studies, failure to exhibit reduced total peripheral blood B-cells, tumor necrosis factor-producing B-cells, plasmablasts, and CD4- and CD8-positive T-cell populations under ocrelizumab treatment were found to be associated with suboptimal response to ocrelizumab (5,7,8). However, most previous determinators of ocrelizumab efficacy have been described in progressive forms of MS and only a narrow band of peripheral blood cell subsets have been investigated. In this study, to explore the mechanisms and potential immunological predictors associated with favorable response to ocrelizumab in RRMS, we investigated possible associations between peripheral blood subset populations and no evidence of disease activity (NEDA) in MS.