MethodsConsecutive serum samples were included from patients with chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy (CIDP) nationwide who were referred to our laboratory for antibody testing with questionnaires as part of routine clinical practice and who fulfilled definite European Federation of Neurological Societies and Peripheral Nerve Society electrodiagnostic criteria. Anti-Caspr1 immunoglobulin (Ig) G was screened using in-house ELISA and confirmed using immunohistochemistry and Western blotting. Clinical data, electrophysiologic findings, and treatment responses were retrospectively collected. The pathologic features of sural nerves were also examined. Inflammatory Neuropathy Cause and Treatment (INCAT) disability scores, antibody titers, and serum neurofilament light chain (NfL) levels were analyzed at baseline and follow-up. MethodsParticipantsSerum samples from patients with immune-mediated neuropathies at multiple medical institutions in Japan were sent to the Department of Neurology at Kyushu University for diagnostic tests of paranodal autoantibodies as part of routine clinical practice, with questionnaires including clinical, laboratory, and electrophysiologic data supplied by treating physicians. Of these, we enrolled consecutive serum samples from patients with CIDP fulfilling the definite European Federation of Neurological Societies (EFNS)/PNS electrodiagnostic criteria between October 2015 and December 2023 (Figure 1). In addition, consecutive patients with electrodiagnostically definite CIDP who were followed at Kyushu University Hospital between April 2000 and December 2023 were included. We excluded patients with anti-NF155 IgG (NF155 AN) or without available samples. Screening for anti-CNTN1 IgG was also performed to evaluate double positivity for autoantibodies targeting CNTN1 and Caspr1.18,26 Patients with anti-CNTN1 IgG were referred to as “CNTN1 AN,” and those with IgG against Caspr1 and CNTN1 were referred to as “Caspr1 and CNTN1 AN.”26 Autoantibodies against NF155 or CNTN1 were measured using flow cytometric cell-based assay (CBA) with human embryonic kidney 293 cell lines stably expressing human NF155 or CNTN1, as previously described.6,27 Two additional cases diagnosed as Caspr1 AN in Yamaguchi University23 (patient 19) and Nagoya University (patient 20) were included for clinical characterization. Serum samples from both patients were referred to the Department of Neurology at Kyushu University to confirm antibody positivity. Serum samples from patients with other peripheral neuropathies, including Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS)/Fisher syndrome (n = 49); anti–myelin-associated glycoprotein neuropathy (n = 11); Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (n = 9); hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies (n = 1); and polyneuropathy, organomegaly, endocrinopathy, M protein, and skin changes syndrome (n = 9), were used as disease controls. Serum samples of healthy controls (n = 32) were taken from a former study.6 Clinical and laboratory data were obtained from a questionnaire and medical records. Nerve conduction studies (NCSs) were performed using standard procedures at each institution. We collected the following neurophysiologic data: motor nerve conduction and F-wave studies in the median, ulnar, and tibial nerves and sensory conduction studies in the median, ulnar, and sural nerves. Bilateral values were included when available. Baseline-to-peak amplitudes were measured for compound muscle action potentials. Concomitant diabetes mellitus was defined by hemoglobin A1c values ≥6.5% (national glycohemoglobin standardization program) or the use of glucose-lowering treatment. Regarding treatment response, a good response was defined as an improvement ≥1 point in the Inflammatory Neuropathy Cause and Treatment (INCAT) disability score. A partial response was defined as an improvement of neurologic symptoms, examined by treating neurologists, without achieving a 1-point improvement in the INCAT score.Figure 1Study FlowchartAN = autoimmune nodopathy; Caspr1 = contactin-associated protein 1; CBA = cell-based assay; CIDP = chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy; CNTN1 = contactin 1; IgG = immunoglobulin G; IHC = immunohistochemistry; NF155 = neurofascin 155; WB = Western blotting.ELISARecombinant human Caspr1 extracellular domain (rhCaspr1; 2418-CR, amino acids 20–1280, R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN) was maintained at 4°C overnight in 96-well plates (9018, Corning, Corning, NY), with 0.1 μg of protein in 100 μL/well of phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). We used identical recombinant protein as in previous research.18,19,23 The plates were washed with 0.1% Tween 20 in PBS and blocked with 5% skim milk in PBS for 1 hour at room temperature (RT). Serum samples were mixed with 2% skim milk in PBS (1:200 dilution). After washing, the plates were incubated with 100 μL/well of mixed samples for 1 hour at RT. They were then washed and incubated with a horseradish peroxidase (HRP)–conjugated goat anti-human IgG diluted 1:40,000 (ab98624, Abcam, Cambridge, United Kingdom) or mouse anti-human IgG1 (A-10648, Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA), anti-human IgG2 (MH1722, Invitrogen), anti-human IgG3 (05-3620, Invitrogen), and anti-human IgG4 (A-10654, Invitrogen) diluted 1:500 in 2% skim milk in PBS for 1 hour at RT. After washing, 100 μL of tetramethyl benzidine-substrate solution (05298-80, Nacalai Tesque, Kyoto, Japan) was added to each well and incubated for 10 minutes. Finally, 100 μL of 1 M sulfuric acid was added to each well, and the optical density (OD) at 450 nm was measured using a multi-microplate reader (MTP-800AFC, Corona Electric, Ibaraki, Japan). Each sample was analyzed in duplicate, and the corrected OD was calculated by subtracting the mean OD value of PBS-coated wells from that of rhCaspr1-coated wells to exclude nonspecific background signals. Positive results were defined as corrected OD values >mean + 5 SD of healthy controls. Accordingly, the corrected OD values were termed anti-Caspr1 IgG or IgG subclass titers. Titers of all positive samples were determined by serum dilution from 1:200 to 1:6,400.ImmunohistochemistryTeased fibers of murine sciatic nerves were prepared as previously described.6 They were permeabilized with 2% Triton X-100 in PBS for 30 minutes, blocked in 10% normal goat serum and 1% Triton-X100 in PBS for 1 hour, and then incubated overnight at 4°C with rabbit polyclonal anti-Caspr1 IgG (ab34151, Abcam; 1:500 dilution), which recognizes its intracellular epitope (amino acids 1350 to C-terminal), and serum samples from patients diluted 1:20 in blocking solution. After washing, the fibers were incubated for 1 hour with Alexa 488–labeled goat anti-rabbit IgG and Alexa 647–labeled goat anti-human IgG (Invitrogen) diluted 1:500 in blocking solution. They were then washed, mounted with Fluoromount (Diagnostic BioSystems, Pleasanton, CA), and examined using confocal microscopy (A1, Nikon, Tokyo, Japan). Staining patterns that were limited to the paranodes with the colocalization of a commercial paranodal marker were defined as positive.5,8,14Western BlottingEach protein sample (per lane: 500 ng of rhCaspr1; R&D Systems) was mixed with reducing or nonreducing sample buffer (09499-14 or 09500-64, respectively, Nacalai Tesque) and heated at 95°C for 3 minutes. Samples were loaded into polyacrylamide gradient gels (4561086, Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA) and electrophoresed in Tris-glycine-sodium dodecyl sulfate running buffer. Proteins were then transferred onto polyvinylidene difluoride membranes (IPVH00010, Millipore, Burlington, MA). The membranes were blocked with 5% skim milk in Tris-buffered saline with 0.1% Tween 20 (TBS-T) and cut into strips. Each strip was separately incubated overnight at 4°C with serum samples from patients diluted 1:100 or mouse monoclonal anti-Caspr1 IgG (sc-374489, Santa Cruz, Dallas, TX) diluted 1:20,000 in TBS-T with 2% skim milk. Membranes were washed with TBS-T and incubated with an HRP-conjugated goat anti-human IgG (Abcam) diluted 1:20,000 or horse anti-mouse IgG (PI-2000, Vector Laboratories, Newark, CA) diluted 1:40,000 in TBS-T for 1 hour at RT. After washing, signals were detected using ECL Prime detection reagents (RPN2232, Cytiva, Marlborough, MA) and a ChemiDoc Touch imaging system (Bio-Rad Laboratories). Protein levels were normalized using an HRP-conjugated anti-His-tag monoclonal IgG (D291-7, MBL, Tokyo, Japan) diluted 1:5,000 in TBS-T with 2% skim milk.Immunoadsorption AssaySerum samples from patients with anti-Caspr1 IgG were diluted 1:20 in blocking solution and preadsorbed with rhCaspr1 (5 μg/mL) for 1 hour at 4°C. The postreaction immunohistochemical protocols were performed as described in the Immunohistochemistry section.Neurofilament Light Chain MeasurementsSerum neurofilament light chain (NfL) was measured using a Simoa NF-light V2 advantage kit (104073, Quanterix, Billerica, MA) on a Simoa HD-X analyzer. Serum samples were stored at −80°C until used. They were diluted at 1:4 with sample diluents. Serum NfL levels were analyzed in duplicate following the manufacturer's instructions and standard procedures.Sural Nerve BiopsyPathologic studies of sural nerve biopsy specimens from patients with anti-Caspr1 IgG were performed as previously described.13 Specimens were fixed with glutaraldehyde and embedded in epoxy resin. Semithin sections were stained with toluidine blue and observed using light microscopy. The degree of pathologic findings was graded into 4 levels: none, mild, moderate, and severe. A portion of each glutaraldehyde-fixed sample was used for a teased fiber study and assessed using previous criteria.13 The electron microscopic study was performed as previously described.13Statistical AnalysisThe Mann-Whitney U test was used to evaluate median differences between the 2 groups. Categorical data were analyzed using the Fisher exact test. The Spearman rank correlation coefficient was used to assess relationships between continuous variables. Differences in serum NfL levels between subgroups and their correlation with the INCAT disability score were investigated using age at sampling as a candidate covariate. The Wilcoxon signed-rank test was used to compare differences in paired values at baseline and follow-up. p Values <0.05 were considered significant. Statistical analyses were performed using JMP 16.0.0 (SAS Institute, Cary, NC).Standard Protocol Approvals, Registrations, and Patient ConsentsThe study was approved by the ethics committee of Kyushu University Hospital (22312-03). Written informed consent was obtained from participants, and an opt-out recruitment method was adopted.Data AvailabilityThe data sets are not publicly available based on the current consent status of the participants. However, data will be available on reasonable request and with permission of the corresponding author following appropriate procedures. ParticipantsSerum samples from patients with immune-mediated neuropathies at multiple medical institutions in Japan were sent to the Department of Neurology at Kyushu University for diagnostic tests of paranodal autoantibodies as part of routine clinical practice, with questionnaires including clinical, laboratory, and electrophysiologic data supplied by treating physicians. Of these, we enrolled consecutive serum samples from patients with CIDP fulfilling the definite European Federation of Neurological Societies (EFNS)/PNS electrodiagnostic criteria between October 2015 and December 2023 (Figure 1). In addition, consecutive patients with electrodiagnostically definite CIDP who were followed at Kyushu University Hospital between April 2000 and December 2023 were included. We excluded patients with anti-NF155 IgG (NF155 AN) or without available samples. Screening for anti-CNTN1 IgG was also performed to evaluate double positivity for autoantibodies targeting CNTN1 and Caspr1.18,26 Patients with anti-CNTN1 IgG were referred to as “CNTN1 AN,” and those with IgG against Caspr1 and CNTN1 were referred to as “Caspr1 and CNTN1 AN.”26 Autoantibodies against NF155 or CNTN1 were measured using flow cytometric cell-based assay (CBA) with human embryonic kidney 293 cell lines stably expressing human NF155 or CNTN1, as previously described.6,27 Two additional cases diagnosed as Caspr1 AN in Yamaguchi University23 (patient 19) and Nagoya University (patient 20) were included for clinical characterization. Serum samples from both patients were referred to the Department of Neurology at Kyushu University to confirm antibody positivity. Serum samples from patients with other peripheral neuropathies, including Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS)/Fisher syndrome (n = 49); anti–myelin-associated glycoprotein neuropathy (n = 11); Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (n = 9); hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies (n = 1); and polyneuropathy, organomegaly, endocrinopathy, M protein, and skin changes syndrome (n = 9), were used as disease controls. Serum samples of healthy controls (n = 32) were taken from a former study.6 Clinical and laboratory data were obtained from a questionnaire and medical records. Nerve conduction studies (NCSs) were performed using standard procedures at each institution. We collected the following neurophysiologic data: motor nerve conduction and F-wave studies in the median, ulnar, and tibial nerves and sensory conduction studies in the median, ulnar, and sural nerves. Bilateral values were included when available. Baseline-to-peak amplitudes were measured for compound muscle action potentials. Concomitant diabetes mellitus was defined by hemoglobin A1c values ≥6.5% (national glycohemoglobin standardization program) or the use of glucose-lowering treatment. Regarding treatment response, a good response was defined as an improvement ≥1 point in the Inflammatory Neuropathy Cause and Treatment (INCAT) disability score. A partial response was defined as an improvement of neurologic symptoms, examined by treating neurologists, without achieving a 1-point improvement in the INCAT score.Figure 1Study FlowchartAN = autoimmune nodopathy; Caspr1 = contactin-associated protein 1; CBA = cell-based assay; CIDP = chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy; CNTN1 = contactin 1; IgG = immunoglobulin G; IHC = immunohistochemistry; NF155 = neurofascin 155; WB = Western blotting. Statistical AnalysisThe Mann-Whitney U test was used to evaluate median differences between the 2 groups. Categorical data were analyzed using the Fisher exact test. The Spearman rank correlation coefficient was used to assess relationships between continuous variables. Differences in serum NfL levels between subgroups and their correlation with the INCAT disability score were investigated using age at sampling as a candidate covariate. The Wilcoxon signed-rank test was used to compare differences in paired values at baseline and follow-up. p Values <0.05 were considered significant. Statistical analyses were performed using JMP 16.0.0 (SAS Institute, Cary, NC).