INTRODUCTIONMost available phosphorylated tau (p‐tau)217 immunoassays have similar performance. It is unclear if this is due to the use of the same antibody (the “ALZpath antibody”). We established and evaluated a novel p‐tau217 assay that uses an alternative antibody and benchmarked the results against ALZpath‐p‐tau217. 1INTRODUCTIONIn the last 5 years there has been a substantial surge in the number of studies evaluating the diagnostic and prognostic utility of plasma biomarkers for Alzheimer's disease (AD), particularly phosphorylated tau (p‐tau). 1 , 2 , 3 Plasma p‐tau181 was the first blood‐based p‐tau biomarker to be described 4 , 5 , 6 and was quickly followed by p‐tau217, 7 p‐tau231, 8 and lately p‐tau212. 9 Furthermore, multi‐analyte methods using immunoassay or mass spectrometry approaches that provide concurrent measurement of these analytes are now available. 10 , 11 , 12 A converging point in the dozens of studies evaluating plasma p‐tau is that the levels of these biomarkers are elevated according to the severity of AD pathophysiology while individuals presenting with non‐AD neurogenerative diseases show normal levels similar to those of unaffected controls. 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 13 , 14 , 15 These findings highlight the value of plasma p‐tau biomarkers for AD prognosis, diagnosis, staging, and differential diagnosis.Recent investigations have suggested that plasma p‐tau217 tends to demonstrate superior diagnostic and prognostic accuracies compared to p‐tau181 and p‐tau231, especially in the preclinical stages, 14 , 15 , 16 , 17 while another study reported equivalence of plasma p‐tau217 with p‐tau212. 13 To this end, plasma p‐tau217 is poised to be a leading blood‐based AD biomarker as it is gradually being applied in therapeutic trials and in referral clinics. 16 , 18 Nonetheless, there are a few notable gaps in the use of plasma p‐tau217. First, most of the commercial immunoassays currently available use an identical anti‐p‐tau217 antibody from ALZpath Inc.; these include methods from leading entities providing p‐tau diagnostic and laboratory‐developed tests based on which most of the current literature on plasma p‐tau217 has been gathered. Examples of these p‐tau217 assays include, but are not limited to, those from ALZpath/Quanterix, Roche Diagnostics, Beckman Coulter, NULISA/Alamar Biosciences, and SpearBio. Although one could argue that using the same antibody helps streamline results on p‐tau217, the reverse argument also holds true: This practice precludes in‐depth validation of the performance of p‐tau217 toward establishing its accuracies when antibodies from different sources but targeting the same analyte are used. Second, studies in community population–based cohorts are limited, 19 , 20 , 21 so are investigations focusing on autosomal dominant AD (ADAD). 7 , 22 In this study, we performed biochemical evaluation of a novel p‐tau217 antibody against synthetic and recombinant tau reagents as well as by immunohistochemistry of human AD brain tissue. Next, we applied this antibody to develop a new plasma p‐tau217 method, hereafter referred to as Pitt‐p‐tau217 (given that it originated from the University of Pittsburgh), followed by its technical validation. In clinical validation, we benchmarked the p‐tau217 assay performance against that of the widely used commercial p‐tau217 method from ALZpath/Quanterix. Finally, we report the assay accuracies in a blood‐to‐autopsy cohort of ADAD participants as well as in population‐based cohorts of older adults who were predominantly without cognitive symptoms but had received comprehensive brain imaging assessments for amyloid plaque and tau tangle pathologies.