MethodsThis study included patients with anti-MDA5 Ab whose serum was available. Serum cytokine levels were measured using a multiplex bead assay. Prognostic factors were identified using Cox regression and log-rank test. Prognostic factor groups were identified using principal component analysis (PCA) and factor and cluster analyses. The association between cytokine levels and prognostic factors (groups) was examined using PCA and correlation and path analyses. A prognosis-prediction model was developed using prognostic factors from the different groups. MethodsStudy designWe conducted a retrospective cross-sectional study involving patients with anti-MDA5 antibody whose serum samples were available before treatment initiation. This study adhered to the Declaration of Helsinki and was approved by the Bioethics Committee of Dokkyo Medical University (#22081). Written informed consent was obtained from each participant for the use of their serum samples and their clinical and laboratory data.We gathered the following data by reviewing medical records: demographics, medical history, clinical manifestations, organ involvement, and laboratory and radiological findings.Patient selectionParticipants included consecutive patients with anti-MDA5 antibody who were admitted to Dokkyo Medical University Hospital between 2010 and 2022 for initial induction therapy and whose serum was available. Idiopathic inflammatory myopathies (IIMs) and amyopathic dermatomyositis (ADM) were diagnosed according to the Bohan and Peter criteria  and the definition given by Kang et al. , respectively. Patients with reticular opacities, ground-glass opacity (GGO), or a honeycomb appearance on high-resolution computed tomography (HR-CT) were considered to have ILD. RP-ILD was diagnosed when the following conditions were met: worsening dyspnea on exertion, a decrease in partial pressure of oxygen (PaO2) by > 10 mmHg within 4 weeks, newly emerging or expanding GGO on radiographic or CT imaging within 4 weeks, and exclusion of other causes such as infection and drugs . Anti-MDA5 antibodies were detected using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) kits (MBL, Tokyo, Japan). Anti-Ro 52 antibodies were detected using the EUROLINE Myositis Antigen Profile 3 (EUROIMMUNE, Lübeck, Germany). Serum samples for evaluation were collected prior to treatment on the same day immunosuppressive therapy was initiated. HR-CT scans for evaluation were conducted within 0–3 days before the start of immunosuppressive therapy. Control serum samples were obtained from healthy volunteers.TreatmentPatients were treated with ‘triple therapy’ (high-dose glucocorticoid (GC), intravenous cyclophosphamide (CY), and calcineurin inhibitors (CI) as soon as possible after admission. Patients with less severe disease [no respiratory symptoms with normal oxygen saturation, normal ferritin or Kl-6 levels, and small extents of pulmonary abnormalities on HRCT (< 5% of the total lung)] were started treatment with GC and CI and added CY if necessary. Janus kinase (JAK) inhibitors were added to the above triple therapy in patients with poor response to treatment and poor prognostic factors, as previously reported  within 7 days of starting treatment.HR-CT scoringHR-CT imaging was reviewed by investigators blinded to the patients’ clinical information and scored according to the modified methods of Kazerooni et al.  The extent of ILD in each lung field was semi-quantitatively scored as follows: 0, absent; 1, < 10%, 2, 10–25%; 3, 25–50%; 4, 50–75%; and 5, > 75% of the lung field. The CT score was calculated by summing the ILD scores from the six lung fields for each patient, ranging 0–30.Identification of prognostic factorsWe first conducted a comparative analysis of demographics and clinical characteristics between survivors and non-survivors and a univariate Cox regression analysis. Variables with P-values < 0.05 in either analysis were selected as candidate variables. If a log-rank test yielded a P-value < 0.05 for a candidate variable, it was identified as a prognostic factor. Cut-off points were determined using receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves.Measurement of serum cytokine levelsSerum samples were obtained with written permission from the patients and stored at − 80 °C. We measured the serum levels of IL-1β, IL-6, Il-10, IL-15, Il-17, GM-CSF, IFN-α, IFN-γ, IP-10, MCP-1, MIG, and TNF-α using a multiplex bead assay. All reagents were purchased from Bio-Rad Laboratories (Hercules, CA, USA), and the samples were prepared according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The plate was measured on a Bioplex 200 system, and the data were analyzed using the Bio-Plex Manager (Bio-Rad Laboratories). Measurements and analyses were performed by Bio-Rad Laboratories (Tokyo, Japan). When the value was low or out of range, it was set to zero.Statistical analysisAll statistical analyses, except path analysis, were performed using the JMP14 software (SAS Institute Japan, Tokyo, Japan). Path analysis was performed using Jamovi Desktop ver2.3.28 (https://www.jamovi.org/).Normally distributed continuous data were analyzed using a two-sample t-test or one-way analysis of variance and were presented as median and interquartile range (IQR). Categorical data were examined using a chi-squared test or a Fisher’s exact test. Statistical significance was defined as p < 0.05.To examine patterns in prognostic factors and cytokine levels, we conducted principal component analysis (PCA) and factor and cluster analyses using the identified prognostic factors and elevated cytokine levels as variables. Factor and cluster analyses were performed using Promax rotation and Ward’s method, respectively. Survival analysis was performed using log-rank tests and Cox regression analysis. In survival analysis, treatment initiation was defined as time zero for the analyses. The criterion for censoring was loss to follow-up within 365 days of observation.Pearson’s correlation test was used for correlation analyses. The area under the curve (AUC) obtained by an ROC analysis was used to compare the models.When appropriate, the values of the prognostic factors and cytokine levels were logarithmized and standardized (standardized score). If a variable included zero, logarithmization was performed by adding the variable with the smallest value greater than zero to the analyzed variables.The ‘total weighted standardized score’ was used to evaluate the effect of each prognostic factor group on mortality including Cox regression analysis. Since the impact on prognosis differs among factors, a weighted adjustment was made to account for the contribution of each factor to mortality using odd ratio. The ‘total weighted standardized score’ was calculated as the average of the ‘weighted standardized scores’ for the factors within the group. Each ‘weighted standardized score’ was obtained by multiplying the standardized score of the factor by its corresponding standardized odds ratio for death. The standardized odds ratios were calculated using standardized variables in logistic regression analysis. ‘Total weighted standardized scores ‘were further applied in correlation and path analyses to explore relationships among prognostic factors and their impact on mortality.Path analysis was conducted using standardized cytokine scores as exogenous variables and total weighted standardized prognostic scores for the groups as endogenous variables. All the cytokines were initially included as variables in the analysis. Variables whose association with prognostic factors did not meet the P-value<0.10 were excluded. The analysis was continued until the final path diagram was obtained. Study designWe conducted a retrospective cross-sectional study involving patients with anti-MDA5 antibody whose serum samples were available before treatment initiation. This study adhered to the Declaration of Helsinki and was approved by the Bioethics Committee of Dokkyo Medical University (#22081). Written informed consent was obtained from each participant for the use of their serum samples and their clinical and laboratory data.We gathered the following data by reviewing medical records: demographics, medical history, clinical manifestations, organ involvement, and laboratory and radiological findings. Statistical analysisAll statistical analyses, except path analysis, were performed using the JMP14 software (SAS Institute Japan, Tokyo, Japan). Path analysis was performed using Jamovi Desktop ver2.3.28 (https://www.jamovi.org/).Normally distributed continuous data were analyzed using a two-sample t-test or one-way analysis of variance and were presented as median and interquartile range (IQR). Categorical data were examined using a chi-squared test or a Fisher’s exact test. Statistical significance was defined as p < 0.05.To examine patterns in prognostic factors and cytokine levels, we conducted principal component analysis (PCA) and factor and cluster analyses using the identified prognostic factors and elevated cytokine levels as variables. Factor and cluster analyses were performed using Promax rotation and Ward’s method, respectively. Survival analysis was performed using log-rank tests and Cox regression analysis. In survival analysis, treatment initiation was defined as time zero for the analyses. The criterion for censoring was loss to follow-up within 365 days of observation.Pearson’s correlation test was used for correlation analyses. The area under the curve (AUC) obtained by an ROC analysis was used to compare the models.When appropriate, the values of the prognostic factors and cytokine levels were logarithmized and standardized (standardized score). If a variable included zero, logarithmization was performed by adding the variable with the smallest value greater than zero to the analyzed variables.The ‘total weighted standardized score’ was used to evaluate the effect of each prognostic factor group on mortality including Cox regression analysis. Since the impact on prognosis differs among factors, a weighted adjustment was made to account for the contribution of each factor to mortality using odd ratio. The ‘total weighted standardized score’ was calculated as the average of the ‘weighted standardized scores’ for the factors within the group. Each ‘weighted standardized score’ was obtained by multiplying the standardized score of the factor by its corresponding standardized odds ratio for death. The standardized odds ratios were calculated using standardized variables in logistic regression analysis. ‘Total weighted standardized scores ‘were further applied in correlation and path analyses to explore relationships among prognostic factors and their impact on mortality.Path analysis was conducted using standardized cytokine scores as exogenous variables and total weighted standardized prognostic scores for the groups as endogenous variables. All the cytokines were initially included as variables in the analysis. Variables whose association with prognostic factors did not meet the P-value<0.10 were excluded. The analysis was continued until the final path diagram was obtained. Electronic supplementary materialBelow is the link to the electronic supplementary material. Supplementary Material 1