BackgroundWith the approval of disease-modifying treatments (DMTs) for early Alzheimer’s disease (AD), there is an increased need for efficient and non-invasive detection methods for cerebral amyloid-β (Aβ) pathology. Current methods, including positron emission tomography (PET) and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis, are costly and invasive methods that may limit access to new treatments. Plasma tau phosphorylated at threonine-217 (P-tau217) presents a promising alternative, yet optimal cutoffs for treatment eligibility with DMTs like aducanumab require further investigation. This study evaluates the efficacy of one- and two-cutoff strategies for determining DMT eligibility at the Butler Hospital Memory & Aging Program (MAP). BackgroundAccess to novel disease modifying treatments (DMTs) for Alzheimer's disease (AD) hinges upon efficient detection of cerebral amyloid-β (Aβ) pathology in patients with early-stage disease . The recent Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval of amyloid-lowering immunotherapies, such as aducanumab and lecanemab, necessitates the optimization of screening techniques for Aβ pathology, as biomarker confirmation of Aβ status is required prior to treatment . This important requirement represents a major barrier to treatment access for many patients due to current reliance on invasive and expensive positron emission tomography (PET) or cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) testing , and may compound existing racial and ethnic inequalities in AD treatment [6–9]. The development of a minimally invasive and cost-effective screening method to facilitate early detection and intervention is, therefore, of high clinical importance in expanding equitable access to new and forthcoming treatments for early AD .While Aβ-PET/CSF testing remains the standard-of-care, blood biomarkers have been extensively investigated and have been shown to accurately detect cerebral Aβ pathology in large observational cohort studies . Among them, plasma tau phosphorylated at threonine-217 (P-tau217) has emerged as the most promising, with data from the Swedish BioFINDER study and others demonstrating high accuracy for prediction of Aβ status [11–14]. While the majority of this work has focused on using a single P-tau217 cutoff to define Aβ status (referred to here as the ‘one-cutoff’ approach), a number of assay and patient-dependent factors may contribute to test–retest variability and can lead to false positives and negatives . Emerging data suggests that using a tiered ‘two-cutoff’ approach can partly circumvent this issue by defining a borderline or ‘gray zone’ of P-tau217 values that merit confirmatory testing , and theoretically expedited eligibility screening when applied to potential DMT candidates from BioFINDER-2 in a recent publication by Mattsson-Carlgren et al. . While these findings are promising, data are limited in clinical populations who are actively seeking treatment with DMTs, and there is a need to explore the generalizability of cutoffs between cohorts to represent how these tests are likely to be used in clinical practice.Therefore, we sought to address these knowledge gaps by examining the diagnostic performance of P-tau217 at the Butler Hospital Memory & Aging Program (MAP). We hypothesized that plasma P-tau217 would predict Aβ positivity with high diagnostic accuracy when assessing eligibility for treatment with aducanumab. To confirm the usefulness of one- and two-cutoff approaches to P-tau217 interpretation in a relevant clinical context, we established cutoffs in a cohort of Butler MAP Aβ-positive and -negative controls of mixed cognitive status (n = 50), and then cross-validated these cutoffs in a separate cohort that included patients who subsequently received aducanumab alongside Aβ-positive and -negative controls with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) or mild dementia with no contraindications to aducanumab according to the Appropriate Use Recommendations (n = 50) . We additionally compared diagnostic performance of these cutoffs to a matched sample of BioFINDER-2 participants with MCI or mild dementia (n = 50), as well as the previously published cut-offs identified by Mattsson-Carlgren et al.  in predicting Aβ status in all BioFINDER-2 participants deemed potentially eligible for DMTs.Our findings highlight the promise of P-tau217 in expediting DMT eligibility determination, while also addressing key challenges that we address with site-specific cutoffs and comparison of interpretation strategies to handle intermediate P-tau217 values. Our findings, established in memory clinic patients seeking treatment with aducanumab, the first FDA-approved DMT, mark an important translational step towards expanding access to current and future DMTs, a key priority for the field that is expected to improve clinical outcomes for patients living with early AD.