CONCLUSIONS:Direct IL-6 inhibition blunts thrombus formation by reducing collagen-induced platelet activation. These findings offer a potential mechanistic explanation for the results observed in the RESCUE trial and support the rationale of the ongoing ZEUS trial (Ziltivekimab Cardiovascular Outcome Study). DiscussionAs demonstrated in several clinical trials, targeting inflammation can reduce very high residual cardiovascular risk in patients with acute coronary syndromes or stroke.5 More recently, the RESCUE trial reported reduced biomarkers of inflammation and thrombosis in high cardiovascular risk patients treated with the anti–IL-6 mAb ziltivekimab. Based on these observations, a large-scale cardiovascular outcomes trial (ZEUS) is underway. However, if and how direct IL-6 ligand inhibition may provide antithrombotic effects remains unknown. This project investigated the effect of direct IL-6 inhibition on arterial thrombus formation and the underlying cellular mechanisms. Using a murine model of arterial thrombosis, we found blunted thrombus formation in mice receiving direct IL-6 blockade. Of note, before treatment with anti–IL-6 mAb, a state of chronic low-grade inflammation was induced in mice administering low-dose lipopolysaccharide, to mimic the baseline conditions of patients included in the RESCUE trial, who presented chronic kidney disease and systemic inflammation as assessed by hsCRP. IL-6 is secreted by several different cells, such as monocytes, fibroblasts, and endothelial cells, typically after IL-1 stimulation.24 Once secreted in the bloodstream, IL-6 has a range of pleiotropic effects on several different cells, tissues, and organs. Among them, IL-6 induces the liver to synthesize a group of proteins, that is, acute phase proteins, which include CRP, serum amyloid A, and some coagulation cascade components.25 Furthermore IL-6 has a direct effect on endothelial cells, promoting the production of several cytokines and chemokines and eventually initiating the coagulation cascade.26 However, investigation of coagulation factors in the murine model (data not shown) retrieved neutral results, suggesting that the observed antithrombotic effects of direct IL-6 blockade are not related to decreased production coagulation factors or fibrinolysis.Platelets play a pivotal role in arterial thrombus formation upon endothelial damage; therefore, we assessed their reactivity as a possible determinant of the observed antithrombotic effect. Interestingly, we found that platelet reactivity was selectively reduced in response to Collagen-rP, but not ADP or TRAP, in mice treated with IL-6 antibody. This mechanism is particularly relevant to the murine model of arterial thrombosis employed herein, as well as to acute atherothrombotic events. Indeed, this model is based on exposure of collagen in the basement membrane in the subendothelial layer, similar to what occurs after atherosclerotic plaque erosion.27 To increase the translational relevance of our results, we incubated platelets from very high cardiovascular risk patients ex vivo with ziltivekimab biosimilar or IgG1 isotype control. Similar to what was observed in mice, ziltivekimab selectively inhibited platelet reactivity in response to Collagen-rP, but not ADP or TRAP.The interaction between the vascular wall and platelets is crucial in arterial thrombus formation, but the role of IL-6 in this process is still unclear. Endothelial cells release IL-6 under several stressful conditions, including exposure to lipopolysaccharide as in the present study.28,29 On the other hand, platelets induce the release of IL-6 from endothelial cells through the secretion of soluble CD 40 ligand.30 IL-6 may, therefore, play a pivotal role in the amplification and propagation of the thrombosis cascade. IL-6 signaling is a complex process that can occur in 3 possible modalities: classic signaling, trans-signaling, and transpresentation.31 With classic signaling, the cytokine binds its transmembrane receptor gp80 and the IL-6/gp80 complex binds the transmembrane adaptor gp130, activating a signal transduction cascade, mainly through the STAT3 (signal transducer and activator of transcription 3).32 In the trans-signaling, IL-6 binds its soluble receptor (sIL-6R [soluble IL-6 receptor]), constituted by a 55 kDa fraction of gp80, and the IL-6/sIL-6R complex eventually binds the adaptor gp130. Finally, in the transpresentation, IL-6 binds gp80 on the surface of a cell and the IL-6/gp80 complex binds gp130 on the surface of a different cell, mediating a cell-to-cell interaction.24 Resting platelets do not express gp80 on their membrane, but they express gp130 and are thus theoretically responsive to trans-signaling. Experimental evidence shows that, upon stimulation with thrombin, platelets secrete sIL-6R and, in the presence of IL-6, trans-signaling activation induces the expression of gp80 through granules mobilization, thus generating an autocrine activation loop (Figure 2G).33–35 Although trans-signaling has no effect on platelet degranulation or aggregation by itself,35 our results suggest that this autocrine activation loop could have a functional role upon stimulation with collagen. This effect was previously hypothesized by Houck et al36 and Senchenkova et al,37 who described the physical proximity and functional cooperation of gp130 and the collagen receptor gpVI on platelet membrane. The results presented herein provide a functional demonstration of a cross-talk between collagen and IL-6 pathways in platelets. Furthermore, they propose a potential mechanism to explain the expected reduction in cardiovascular risk with direct IL-6 inhibition and support the investigation of direct IL-6 inhibition in clinical practice. In this regard, direct IL-6 blockade may have pleiotropic effects on cardiovascular risk, over and beyond platelet aggregation, by affecting atherosclerosis progression and megakaryocyte maturation, among others.38,39 Interestingly, Marino et al35 observed that the P2Y12 receptor inhibitor cangrelor inhibits the release of sIL-6R from platelets, suggesting that direct IL-6 inhibition could have an overlapping function with P2Y12 receptor inhibitors, a class of drugs commonly employed in dual antiplatelet therapy. In a future perspective, direct IL-6 inhibition could help refine antiplatelet therapy in patients with concomitant high bleeding and high thrombotic risk. In this regard, a vast majority of patients with very high cardiovascular risk receive antiplatelet drugs to prevent the onset or recurrence of major atherothrombotic events. Consistently, >90% of patients recruited for the ex vivo experiment were treated with antiplatelet drugs. The demonstration, although ex vivo, of an effect for direct IL-6 inhibition on top of antiplatelet therapy has great translational relevance, as it supports the potential use of ziltivekimab as an additional treatment for the prevention of major atherothrombotic events.This study presents some limitations. First, data from very high cardiovascular risk patients were obtained by ex vivo incubation of blood samples with ziltivekimab and, therefore, our results do not account for the contribution of other organs and tissues, such as vascular wall and liver, whose function could be affected by the direct IL-6 inhibition in vivo. However, with this approach, we could highlight the direct effect of IL-6 inhibition on platelets excluding possible off-target effects. Although we excluded their contribution in the murine model, some differences may still exist between real patients and mice. As regards the murine model of arterial thrombosis, previous publications highlighted that mechanisms of photothrombosis could be partially independent of platelet activation.40 However, our group successfully investigated platelet dysfunction in a murine model of Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome using this very same method.21 Furthermore, although whole blood was treated with ziltivekimab, only platelets were analyzed. However, whole blood contains several other cells whose function can be modified by direct IL-6 blockade and which can, in turn, interact with platelets. Finally, molecular mechanisms linking collagen and IL-6 signaling in platelets were not further investigated in this paper, a subject for future follow-up studies. ConclusionsDirect IL-6 inhibition attenuates arterial thrombosis in a murine model of endothelial damage and chronic low-grade inflammation. This effect can be attributed to a reduced platelets reactivity to collagen, as observed in both mice and patients with very high cardiovascular risk. These results support the possible use of direct IL-6 inhibition to reduce residual risk and may complement the ongoing clinical trials on this topic.