Materials and methodsThis study comprised 103 participants of both sexes, including 50 patients 56 ± 7 years old with premature CAD and 53 patients 51 ± 10 years old without CAD. CAD was verified using coronary angiography, hsCRP levels were measured using a standard assay, and mCRP levels were measured using fluorescent cytometric beads conjugated with an anti-mCRP antibody. 2Materials and methods2.1Study designPremature CAD was defined as the development of CAD in males before 55 years of age or females before 65 years of age (18).This was a case–control study. Study participants were enrolled from patients admitted to Chazov National Medical Research Center of Cardiology, Moscow, Russia. Males under 55 years of age with the onset of CAD before 50 years of age and females under 65 years of age with the onset of CAD before 60 years of age were eligible for inclusion in the CAD group. Patients without clinical manifestations of CAD and stenotic atherosclerotic lesions in the coronary arteries were eligible for inclusion in the control group.Prior to enrollment, all patients were assessed for clinical manifestations of CAD and coronary angiography. Atherosclerotic lesions were considered stenotic if they narrowed 50% or more of the lumen of the major coronary arteries (the left main, left anterior descending, left circumflex, and right coronary arteries or their branches with a diameter larger than 2 mm) (19).The exclusion criteria were familial hypercholesterolemia, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) levels higher than 4.9 mmol/L, congenital or acquired coagulation disorders, unstable angina, a period within the first 2 months after myocardial infarction, heart failure NYHA class III–IV, a left ventricle ejection fraction less than 40%, the permanent form of atrial fibrillation, aortic or mitral stenosis, malignant tumors, or an episode of acute inflammation within 2 months of the study.Patients meeting the inclusion criteria were asked if they would like to participate in the study. The study included 50 patients (37 male and 13 female) with stable CAD and 53 patients (22 male and 31 female) without CAD.2.2mCRP measurementThis assay utilized cytometric beads (Becton-Dickinson, USA, catalog #560031) conjugated with an anti-mCRP monoclonal antibody clone CRP-8 (Sigma-Aldrich, USA, catalog #C1688). This antibody is specific for mCRP (20–22). Bead-to-antibody binding was performed using Sulfo-SMCC (Sigma-Aldrich, USA, catalog #M6035) and dithiothreitol (Thermo Fisher, USA, catalog #R0861) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. A FITC-labelled polyclonal anti-CRP antibody was used as a detector antibody (ImTek, Russia, catalog #GAHCrp). Recombinant mCRP (a gift by Dr. Yi Wu, Xi’an Jiaotong University, China) was used for calibration (21, 23). Prior to flow cytometry, the samples were incubated with CRP-8-conjugated beads in a dark place at room temperature for 60 min. All measurements were performed using the FACS Canto II flow cytometer (Becton-Dickinson, USA). The assay is described in detail elsewhere (20).2.3Blood sample collection and analysisBlood samples from the cubital vein were collected into S-Monovette 3.8% sodium citrate vials (Sarstedt, Germany) after 12 hours of fasting. Platelet-poor plasma was prepared via centrifugation at 2000 g for 20 min and stored at -70°C. Prior to measurement, the samples were thawed in a water bath at 37°C. The levels of hsCRP were measured using latex-enhanced immunonephelometry on a BN ProSpec analyzer (Dade-Behring, Germany) using the CardioPhase hsCRP assay (Siemens, Germany, catalog #10446090).2.4Statistical analysisThe data are presented as mean ± standard deviation or median (lower quartile; upper quartile) values, as appropriate. The distribution was determined using the Shapiro-Wilk W test. Correlations were assessed using Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient (ρ). A comparative analysis of the two independent groups was performed using the Mann-Whitney U test for quantitative data and Fisher’s exact test for qualitative data. Logistic regression analysis was used to detect the independent risk factors associated with an increased likelihood of CAD. The variables included in the regression model were selected using the Wald test. The quality of the model was assessed using the Hosmer-Lemeshow goodness-of-fit test, the Nagelkerke R2 test and ROC analysis. The results of ROC analysis and the Youden test were used to calculate the optimal cut-off value. Statistical significance was set at p <0.05. All statistical tests were two-tailed. The study was considered sufficiently powered to evaluate a difference between groups of patients at α = 0.90. Statistical analysis was performed using IBM SPSS Statistics (version 26.0; SPSS Inc., USA).2.5Ethical approvalThe study followed Good Clinical Practice standards and the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki. This study was approved by the ethics committee of the Chazov National Medical Research Center of Cardiology of the Ministry of Health of the Russian Federation, Moscow, Russia. Written informed consent was obtained from all participants. 2.1Study designPremature CAD was defined as the development of CAD in males before 55 years of age or females before 65 years of age (18).This was a case–control study. Study participants were enrolled from patients admitted to Chazov National Medical Research Center of Cardiology, Moscow, Russia. Males under 55 years of age with the onset of CAD before 50 years of age and females under 65 years of age with the onset of CAD before 60 years of age were eligible for inclusion in the CAD group. Patients without clinical manifestations of CAD and stenotic atherosclerotic lesions in the coronary arteries were eligible for inclusion in the control group.Prior to enrollment, all patients were assessed for clinical manifestations of CAD and coronary angiography. Atherosclerotic lesions were considered stenotic if they narrowed 50% or more of the lumen of the major coronary arteries (the left main, left anterior descending, left circumflex, and right coronary arteries or their branches with a diameter larger than 2 mm) (19).The exclusion criteria were familial hypercholesterolemia, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) levels higher than 4.9 mmol/L, congenital or acquired coagulation disorders, unstable angina, a period within the first 2 months after myocardial infarction, heart failure NYHA class III–IV, a left ventricle ejection fraction less than 40%, the permanent form of atrial fibrillation, aortic or mitral stenosis, malignant tumors, or an episode of acute inflammation within 2 months of the study.Patients meeting the inclusion criteria were asked if they would like to participate in the study. The study included 50 patients (37 male and 13 female) with stable CAD and 53 patients (22 male and 31 female) without CAD. 2.3Blood sample collection and analysisBlood samples from the cubital vein were collected into S-Monovette 3.8% sodium citrate vials (Sarstedt, Germany) after 12 hours of fasting. Platelet-poor plasma was prepared via centrifugation at 2000 g for 20 min and stored at -70°C. Prior to measurement, the samples were thawed in a water bath at 37°C. The levels of hsCRP were measured using latex-enhanced immunonephelometry on a BN ProSpec analyzer (Dade-Behring, Germany) using the CardioPhase hsCRP assay (Siemens, Germany, catalog #10446090). 2.4Statistical analysisThe data are presented as mean ± standard deviation or median (lower quartile; upper quartile) values, as appropriate. The distribution was determined using the Shapiro-Wilk W test. Correlations were assessed using Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient (ρ). A comparative analysis of the two independent groups was performed using the Mann-Whitney U test for quantitative data and Fisher’s exact test for qualitative data. Logistic regression analysis was used to detect the independent risk factors associated with an increased likelihood of CAD. The variables included in the regression model were selected using the Wald test. The quality of the model was assessed using the Hosmer-Lemeshow goodness-of-fit test, the Nagelkerke R2 test and ROC analysis. The results of ROC analysis and the Youden test were used to calculate the optimal cut-off value. Statistical significance was set at p <0.05. All statistical tests were two-tailed. The study was considered sufficiently powered to evaluate a difference between groups of patients at α = 0.90. Statistical analysis was performed using IBM SPSS Statistics (version 26.0; SPSS Inc., USA).