MethodsTotal MuSK-IgGs were quantified with radioimmunoassay (RIA), ELISA, flow cytometry, and cell-based assay (CBA) serial dilutions using HEK293 cells transfected with MuSK-eGFP. MuSK-IgG subclasses were measured by flow cytometry. SAffCon assay was used for determining MuSK-IgG affinity. MethodsPatient EnrollmentThis retrospective longitudinal study included patients with MuSK-MG treated at Policlinico Universitario “A. Gemelli” IRCCS (Rome, Italy) between 2000 and 2021, from whom at least 2 serum samples collected at different time points were available. All the patients were diagnosed and treated according to standard clinical practice12 and tested positive for MuSK antibodies by radioimmunoassay (RIA) (RSR Limited, Cardiff, UK) at diagnosis. Clinical severity was classified following the Myasthenia Gravis Foundation of America (MGFA) clinical classification, which subgroups patients with signs/symptoms of MG into 5 severity classes (purely ocular MG as class I; mild, moderate, and severe generalized MG as classes II, III, and IV, respectively; and MG crisis as class V).13 The MG outcome was classified with the MGFA postintervention status (PIS).13 Clinical information was available for all serum samples. All these patients had generalized MG, MGFA grades II-V at maximal disease severity. For each patient, at least 1 serum sample was obtained during an acute symptomatic phase of the disease, either at disease onset or during MG exacerbation. In each patient, the samples obtained during the acute phase were compared with the one(s) after therapeutic intervention. The favorable outcome was defined by a MGFA PIS of “minimal manifestation (MMs)–or-better.”Cell-Based Assays for MuSK AntibodiesIn-house live cell-based assay (CBA) for MuSK antibody detection was performed as previously reported.14 In brief, HEK293 cells were transiently transfected with polyethyleneimine (PEI, cat#: 408727, Sigma-Aldrich, MO) with a plasmid encoding for MuSK-eGFP (kindly provided by Prof. Beeson and Prof. Vincent, Oxford, UK) and, 36–48 hours after transfection, were incubated with patients' serum samples (1:20 dilution) for 1 hour at room temperature. After fixation with 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA, cat# 158127, Sigma-Aldrich), human IgG labeling was demonstrated with a secondary goat anti-human IgG Fc-specific Alexa Fluor 594 antibody (1:750, 09-585-098, Jackson Labs). Coverslips were then mounted with a mounting medium (DakoCytomation, Cambridge, UK) containing 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindol (DAPI, 1:1000). CBA results were assessed by fluorescence microscopy on the following day, and labeling of the secondary antibody was scored as previously described.15 Antibody titration was performed using 2-fold serial dilutions (starting at 1:25), the last one giving detectable signal (CBA score ≥1) being considered as end-point dilution.Quantification of Total MuSK-IgG and MuSK-IgG Subclasses by Flow CytometrySerum IgG labeling on MuSK-transfected live HEK293 cells was quantified using fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) analysis, as previously described.16 In brief, all serum samples (1:20 dilution in FACS buffer: phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) 1X, cat# 10010023, Gibco-Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA; 0.1% bovine serum albumin, Sigma-Aldrich, USA; 2 mM EDTA, cat# E6758, Sigma-Aldrich) were incubated for 1 hour with 100,000 MuSK-eGFP HEK293 cells in suspension; then, after washing, IgG binding was detected with a mouse anti-human IgG Alexa Fluor 647 secondary antibody (1:400, cat#: 9040-31, Southern Biotech). Finally, cells were stained with DAPI (1:1000) for 15 minutes and then assessed by FACS (CytoFLEX, Beckman Coulter Life Sciences). The levels of each MuSK-IgG isotype were determined using the same protocol and the following secondary antibodies: mouse anti-human IgG1 Alexa Fluor 647 (1:200, cat#: 9052-31, Southern Biotech, USA), mouse anti-human IgG2 Alexa Fluor 647 (1:200, cat#: 9070-31, Southern Biotech), mouse anti-human IgG3 Alexa Fluor 647 (1:200, cat#:9210-31, Southern Biotech), and mouse anti-human IgG4 PE (1:400, cat#: 9200-09, Southern Biotech). Total MuSK-IgG levels and MuSK-IgG subclasses were calculated by the delta median fluorescent intensity (ΔMFI) of the transfected (single cells/viable/eGFP-positive gates) minus untransfected (single cells/viable/eGFP-negative gates) cells. The cutoff was determined for each ΔMFI using 10 healthy controls (mean value plus 3 standard deviations). To quantify antibody binding and standardize ΔMFI values across different experimental sessions, Quantum Simply Cellular (QSC) anti-mouse IgG beads (Cat.# 815, Bangs Laboratories, Inc) were used according to the manufacturer's instructions. Each QSC kit consists of 5 bead populations—1 blank and 4 populations with increasing levels of Fc-specific capture antibody. QSC microspheres labeled with fluorochrome-conjugated antibodies have the same spectral properties as cells labeled with the same antibodies; they thus serve as an accurate compensation standard that covers the intensity range of cells with different expression levels. In brief, QSC beads were labeled to saturation with the same antibody that was used to label cells (diluted in FACS buffer) and run on the same instrument, using the same settings and on the same day as cell samples to reduce any possible bias. Channel values for the bead populations were recorded in lot-specific QuickCal software, and a regression associating fluorescence channel values to the beads' antibody binding capacity (ABC) values was calculated. ABC values were then assigned to stained cell samples using this standard curve. Through this method, for each sample, ΔMFI was converted into its corresponding standardized ABC value, which was used to quantify the amount of antibodies bound to MuSK-HEK293 cells.Recombinant MuSK Protein GenerationThe extracellular domain (ECD) of human MuSK (UniProt position: 1–472) was subcloned into the pcDNA3.1 vector. The C-terminal region contained a short, flexible linker, followed by a 6× histidine tag. HEK293F cells were transduced using linear PEI at a vector-to-PEI ratio of 1:3, and culture supernatants were harvested 3 days after transduction. The recombinant MuSK ECD was purified using HisPur Ni-NTA beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as per the manufacturer's instructions.Measurement of MuSK-IgG by Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA)Binding strength of serum to recombinant MuSK ECD was assessed by direct ELISA. Recombinant MuSK was coated on Nunc MaxiSorp ELISA plates (Biolegend) at a concentration of 2 µg/mL overnight at 4°C and subsequently blocked with blocking buffer (50 mM Tris, 0.14 M NaCl, 1% BSA, pH 8.0). Serial dilutions of the serum were prepared in sample buffer (50 mM Tris, 0.14 M NaCl, 1% BSA, 0.05% Tween 20, pH 8.0). After 3 washes of plates with wash buffer (50 mM Tris, 0.14 M NaCl, 0.05% Tween 20, pH 8.0), 100 µL of each serial dilution was added to the plates in duplicate and incubated for 1 hour. Plates were then washed 3 times with 250 µL per well of wash buffer. For detection of IgG binding, 1:3000 dilution of a goat anti-human IgG-horseradish peroxidase–conjugated secondary antibody (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was prepared in a sample buffer and 100 µL was added to each well for 1 hour. Plates were washed further 3 times and developed for 10 minutes with 1-Step TMB ELISA Substrate (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and reaction was stopped by the addition of 3M hydrochloric acid. The optical density at 490 nm (OD490) was measured using a FLUOstar Omega Microplate Reader (BMG Labtech). The background value was set at the OD490 value of blank wells without incubation of serum samples, and the area under the curve was calculated. Data were analyzed in R stats.17Titration of MuSK Antibodies by RIATo quantify the antibodies, each sample was first serially titrated to establish the volume of serum required to immunoprecipitate 50% of the available 125I-MuSK (approx. 10,000 cpm; RSR Ltd, United Kingdom). The final volumes varied from 0.003 µL to 0.1 µL, indicating levels of MuSK antibodies between 12 and 360 nM. The values are given in eTable 1.Determination of MuSK Antibody Affinity by SAffCon AssayTo determine affinity and concentration, in a subset of samples with enough material available, dilutions of serum (1:100, 1:20, 1:5) were mixed with Alexa Fluor 647 labeled MuSK protein (10 nM and 100 nM) and incubated for 30 minutes at 4°C to allow equilibration of the binding interaction. Samples were run in duplicate on a Fluidity One-M instrument (Fluidic Analytics) using size setting 3 (3.0–14 nm) and viscosity setting 3 to determine the average hydrodynamic radius (Rh) of the labeled species in the mixture. The flow buffer used was PBS (pH 7.4) with 5% (w/v) human serum albumin and 10% (w/v) glycerol. Data were fit using SAffCon with Bayesian fitting application of Fluidity Intelligence, which determined initial fit parameters and additional points that would most efficiently improve fit quality. Additional points were run as recommended and added to the analysis in an iterative manner until results converged or no further improvement could be achieved.18 To confirm that the measurements provided reflect antibody affinity and not avidity, raw data were checked to rule out evidence of network formation that could result from polyclonal antibodies cross-linking MuSK by binding at different epitopes (which would lead to the measurement of avidity using a solution-phase technique as the one used here). No evidence of network formation was found in any of the analyzed samples.Statistical AnalysisContinuous variables are presented as median with interquartile range (IQR) and categorical variables as proportions and percentages. Data distribution was assessed using the Shapiro-Wilk normality test. Statistical comparisons were performed using the Student t test for paired data or the Wilcoxon signed rank test, as appropriate. Correlation analysis was performed using a linear mixed-effects model or Spearman correlation, as appropriate. The linear mixed-effects model takes into account multiple measurements per patient and the variability in the number of measurements between patients. The strength of the correlation was quantified with the Spearman rank correlation coefficient (rs). To depict the relationship between variables, a simple linear regression was performed. A p value inferior to 0.05 was considered statistically significant. Statistical analysis and graphs were done with Graph Pad Prism v10 (Graph Pad Software, La Jolla, CA) and R stats.17Standard Protocol Approvals, Registrations, and Patient ConsentsAll patients provided written consent to the participation in this study. The study was conducted according to the Helsinki Declaration and approved by the Ethics Committee of the Catholic University of Sacred Heart (Rome, Italy) with E.C. protocol number 49886/18 (9024/19).Data AvailabilityAnonymized data not published within this article will be made available on reasonable request from any qualified investigator. Statistical AnalysisContinuous variables are presented as median with interquartile range (IQR) and categorical variables as proportions and percentages. Data distribution was assessed using the Shapiro-Wilk normality test. Statistical comparisons were performed using the Student t test for paired data or the Wilcoxon signed rank test, as appropriate. Correlation analysis was performed using a linear mixed-effects model or Spearman correlation, as appropriate. The linear mixed-effects model takes into account multiple measurements per patient and the variability in the number of measurements between patients. The strength of the correlation was quantified with the Spearman rank correlation coefficient (rs). To depict the relationship between variables, a simple linear regression was performed. A p value inferior to 0.05 was considered statistically significant. Statistical analysis and graphs were done with Graph Pad Prism v10 (Graph Pad Software, La Jolla, CA) and R stats.17