ConclusionsThis study, which included participants treated with aducanumab, confirms the utility of one- and two-cutoff strategies for interpreting plasma P-tau217 in assessing DMT eligibility. Using P-tau217 could potentially replace more invasive diagnostic methods, and all aducanumab-treated participants would have been deemed eligible based on P-tau217. However, false positives remain a concern, particularly when applying externally derived cutoffs that exhibited lower specificity which could have led to inappropriate treatment of Aβ-negative participants. Future research should focus on prospective validation of P-tau217 cutoffs to enhance their generalizability and inform standardized treatment decision-making across diverse populations. DiscussionThe current study offers evidence supporting the utility of plasma P-tau217 as an accessible biomarker for cerebral Aβ pathology, which is essential to confirm prior to initiation of amyloid-lowering agents. While aducanumab has since been discontinued by the manufacturer, the potential clinical application of our findings remains highly relevant given the recent FDA approval of lecanemab , as well as the positive phase 3 data for donanemab , where accurate biomarker-based screening is paramount for candidate selection. Our findings agree with previous studies in the Swedish BioFINDER cohort which have shown similarly high diagnostic accuracy of P-tau217 in predicting Aβ positivity in MCI and mild dementia populations [11–13, 15–17]. The cross-validation of specific P-tau217 cutoffs in our Training and Test Cohort demonstrates its internal consistency and reliability across clinical scenarios at our site, however cutoffs generated from matched BioFINDER-2 participants exhibited mixed performance, and those from previously published data failed to replicate in our cohort . Provided that these challenges in generalizability of cutoffs can be surmounted , P-tau217 could significantly enhance the scalability of DMT programs such as ours, paving the way for broader treatment accessibility in primary care and other non-tertiary settings.These findings are timely given the anticipated Revised Criteria for Diagnosis and Staging of AD from the Alzheimer’s Association Work Group, which at present proposes that elevated plasma P-tau217 is sufficient to fulfill Core 1 criteria for A (amyloidosis) and T1 (secreted phosphorylated tau fragments) for a biomarker diagnosis of AD . However, Core 2 criteria including tau tangle burden (T2) is not fully captured by P-tau217 and may be an important factor in predicting response to amyloid-lowering treatments, as seen in the recently published phase 3 data for donanemab . A recent study identified CSF microtubule-binding region of tau containing the residue 243 (MTBR-tau43) as a novel fluid biomarker of tau tangle pathology, holding potential alongside P-tau217 and other biomarkers for detailed molecular staging of AD, although more work is needed to examine its performance as a more accessible blood test . If successful, this methodological innovation would represent a major step forward in the biomarker field, potentially shaping future personalized medicine approaches to DMTs.Our retrospective analysis indicates that P-tau217 is a promising tool to determine DMT eligibility for individuals seeking treatment with aducanumab, and our comparison of cutoffs and strategies in a cohort of patients subsequently treated with aducanumab marks an important translational step towards providing clinical guidance on the use of specific blood biomarker interpretation strategies at the level of an individual patient . Our data suggest that the use of two-cutoffs to stratify patients is feasible in the memory clinic setting, and may reduce false positives to more effectively discriminate AD from non-AD cases. Rather than replacing PET/CSF tests entirely, this more nuanced approach addresses the diagnostic uncertainty in borderline cases by providing standardized guidance to target confirmatory testing to this group. While we relied on a single reference method for our analysis, removing the intermediate-range cases from treatment decisions also proved to be an effective approach. Alternatively, the use of targeted CSF testing to handle intermediate-range P-tau217 is supported by two recently published studies which showed that showed enhanced prediction of amyloid PET status using P-tau217 with reflex CSF confirmatory testing . Based on these results, it appears that the two-cutoff strategy could be a viable alternative for reducing reliance on PET/CSF testing when determining DMT eligibility. However, more work is needed to assess how clinical outcomes may change when these approaches are used to prospectively select patients for treatment.Importantly, our study identified higher optimal cutoffs than the recent paper by Mattsson-Carlgren et al. , despite harmonized blood collection protocols, centralized measurement of P-tau217 levels, similar analytic approaches and large effect sizes for the prediction of amyloid status . This could be due to differences in the inclusion of preclinical AD in the Butler MAP Training Cohort or test–retest variability in immunoassay performance, although the adjusted model and the cutoffs generated in the matched BioFINDER-2 Training Cohort argue against these explanations. Ongoing efforts by our laboratory and others to develop and refine standardized calibrators may help to further reduce inter-assay variability observed with immunoassay techniques . Avenues for future research include examining prediction models that control for specific comorbidities and medications that may influence P-tau217 levels , as well as exploration of as-yet unknown lifestyle factors (i.e. diet, exercise, sleep, stress) and differing prevalence of AD that could impact choice of cutoff for a given population. Given the strong internal validity between training/test cohorts our study and the analysis by Mattsson-Carlgren et al. , and the differences in optimal cutoffs that were observed between these studies, we continue to recommend using site-specific cutoffs when considering implementation of P-tau217 for clinical use, as specific cutoffs are not yet generalizable.While our study's findings are promising, they must be interpreted within the context of some important limitations. The retrospective, cross-sectional design limits our ability to compare P-tau217 with multiple measures of Aβ or tau status, and additionally limits our ability to assess treatment outcomes when P-tau217 is used to detect Aβ positivity compared to standard approaches. Although we have previously published data on a subset of participants who experienced amyloid-related imaging abnormalities (ARIA), treatment decisions were made based on Aβ-PET/CSF results in line with the Appropriate Use Recommendations for aducanumab . While our sample included all registry participants treated with aducanumab in our clinic (and are generally reflective of those who traditionally participate in DMT trials at our site), the potential for ascertainment bias and our limited sample size likely reduces generalizability compared to other, larger studies . Furthermore, this cohort is not demographically diverse and does not fully represent the general population at risk for AD, a problem for research on blood biomarkers, DMTs and the field more broadly . There may be important fluid and imaging biomarker-related interactions with self-reported race, social determinants of health, medical comorbidities and APOE genotype that remain understudied and not captured by our analysis [33–36].Future prospective research should seek to identify and address remaining barriers to routine clinical use with a focus on diverse populations in non-tertiary care settings. This is essential, especially in the context of efforts to expand treatment to traditionally underserved groups. Surmounting these remaining hurdles will require coordinated efforts between clinical sites to assess the precision and reliability of P-tau217 measurements when conducted on an individual basis, as opposed to batch testing, to ensure consistent and accurate results in clinical practice given the potential for inter-assay variability . We must also move to assess dissemination and implementation-based strategies to improve communication of advances in the field to community healthcare providers and patients, with the goal of improving AD diagnosis and treatment in equitable and sustainable ways. ConclusionsThis study substantiates the use of plasma P-tau217 as a viable biomarker for DMT eligibility screening, with potential significant impacts on clinical practice. The two-cutoff strategy presents an innovative method to refine biomarker analysis for the purpose of determining treatment eligibility or need for additional confirmatory testing. These findings underscore the challenge of applying specific cutoffs across studies and populations. Future research should aim to develop standardized cutoffs using samples drawn from multiple sites, and investigate broader clinical applications of P-tau217 and other blood biomarkers.