ConclusionOur findings might indicate that CSF IgLON5-specific IgG4 is frequently produced intrathecally, especially in HLA-DRB1*10:01 carriers. Intrathecally produced IgG4 may be clinically relevant. While many immunotherapies reduce serum IgLON5 IgG levels, more intense immunotherapies induce clinical improvement and may be able to target intrathecally produced anti-IgLON5 IgG. Further studies need to confirm whether anti-IgLON5 IgG4 IS is a suitable prognostic and predictive biomarker in anti-IgLON5 disease. DiscussionIn this retrospective longitudinal study, we investigated IgLON5 IgG subclass profiles in serum and CSF in 13 IgLON5 patients in the context of the patients’ HLA alleles, clinical presentation, disease severity, and immunotherapy. Our strategy was to analyze all parameters or their change at the beginning and end of each clinical follow-up interval that included sampling of biofluids for assessment of anti-IgLON5 subclass levels, using flow cytometry along with an innovative quantitative technique to quantify the IS of anti-IgLON5 IgG4.Although the results of our exploratory study often did not meet criteria of statistical significance, they yielded a coherent picture, allowing to generate new hypotheses of the biology of anti-IgLON5 disease, particularly (A) that intrathecally produced CSF IgLON5 IgG4 as well as the cellular inflammatory response may depend on the HLA genotype and, if present, (B) may represent a marker of clinical and prognostic relevance in a subset of patients, and (C) that patients may be more likely to benefit from immunosuppressive treatment in combination. Our main findings that support these hypotheses are that (1) DRB1*10:01 non-carriers show lower CSF-to-serum anti–IgLON5-IgG4 levels and CSF leukocytes when compared to carriers of this risk allele, (2) anti-IgLON5 IgG4 IS was observed not only in all analyzed DRB1*10:01 carriers but also in one non-carrier, (3) the reduction in anti-IgLON5-IgG4 IS correlated with reduced CSF anti-IgLON5 IgG4 and clinical improvement, and (4) low CSF IgG4 levels were associated with future clinical improvement. Further, (5) although many treatments could reduce serum anti-IgLON5 IgG1/4 levels, clinical improvementwas more frequently observed after intense immunotherapy, often containing combinations of either RTX or IVIG with CS, but especially Aza. Taken together these findings led us to form a new hypothesis: that intrathecal anti-IgLON5 IgG synthesis, especially of IgG4, could potentially represent a surrogate marker for disease activity in a subset of patients and may thus be a promising prognostic and/or predictive biomarker. With the limitation that these are preliminary data of a small patient cohort that warrant further studies with larger patient cohorts to validate, we cautiously suggest that both CSF and serum anti-IgLON5 should be monitored. Before becoming available as routine diagnostic tests, the performance of quantitative assays for IgLON5 IgG1 and IgG4 levels along with new strategies to calculate their IS will have to be validated more extensively. Currently, IS of target-specific antibodies is most frequently presented as AI calculated according to Reiber and Lange (31). However, this procedure has two major disadvantages. First, in the AI formula the denominator for the target-specific antibody CSF/serum ratio switches from the actual QIgG to the 99.5% percentile reference value (Qlim) in case the actual QIgG is higher than Qlim. Thus, in cohorts of individuals with and without proven quantitatively relevant intrathecal IgG synthesis according to Reiber (QIgG>Qlim) (32), the AIs are calculated by different formulas prohibiting quantitative statistical analysis. Second, when patient in a cohort do not exhibit proven quantitatively relevant IgG synthesis according to Reiber (QIgG≤Qlim) but the actual QIgG is above the 50th percentile of the reference range (as in our cohort), the AI formula tends to underestimate IS as the actual QIgG (which might indicate a 90% likelihood of IS if, e.g., it is located at the level of the 90th percentile) but not the estimated QIgG in the absence of IgG IS as the denominator. Both disadvantaged do not occur using the approach suggested by Brauchle et al. and employed in our manuscript, which, in addition, is based on a considerably higher number of data points (27).Our study shows a predominance of IgG4 in 88% of patients. This is in line with a previous study (25) but in contrast to an earlier study with a lower frequency (33%) (1). The IgG4 predominance in our study was largely due to higher IgG4 levels in IgG4-predominant patients but not lower antibody levels of other subclasses, especially IgG1. Furthermore, in our cohort, which showed the expected high frequency of the known risk alleles HLA-DQB1*05:01 and DRB1*10:01, a higher number of risk alleles seemed to coincide with higher anti-IgLON5 IgG4 levels in serum and CSF. The HLA-DQB1*05 allele has been associated with other IgG4-predominant autoimmune diseases (33–36). Recent data supports the view that HLA-DQ containing a β⁠-subunit encoded by the HLA-DQB1*05:01 anti-IgLON5 disease risk allele plays a pivotal role in the presentation of IgLON5 peptides to T-helper cells and initiation of the anti-IgLON5 immune response (37). The authors suggested that any association of anti-IgLON5 disease with HLA-DRB1*10:01 risk allele may be merely indirect due to its linkage disequilibrium with HLA-DQB1*05:01. Nevertheless, our observations suggest that the presence of HLA-DRB1*10:01 may contribute to disease, as the association of HLA-DRB1*10:01 risk allele with proportionally highly CSF anti-IgLON5 IgG levels most likely representing IS described herein seems to be directly mediated by the HLA-DR genotype. Replicating this observation in larger cohorts might yield relevant insight into the pathoimmunobiology of anti-IgLON5 disease.Notably, it has been consistently reported that about 10% of anti-IgLON5 disease patients test negative for anti-IgLON5 IgG in CSF [e.g. (38, 39)]. These probably correspond to those with low CSF levels in our cohort when using flow cytometry. In turn, many patients reported to be CSF anti–IgLON5-positive may have target-specific IgG IS. Indeed, one patient each with anti-IgLON5 in CSF only (18) and higher anti-IgLON5 IgG levels in CSF compared to serum have been reported (40). Do these two groups represent different immunological and clinical phenotypes? In the initial description by Sabater et al., one patient with the clinical diagnosis of PSP and anti-IgLON5 IgG in serum only was reported but at this time due to the negative CSF tests it was doubted whether this actually was anti-IgLON5 disease (4). However, later Gaig et al. reported that in anti-IgLON5 disease with PSP-like phenotype CSF may test negative for anti-IgLON5 IgG in 50% of the patients (1). Interestingly, these patients were threefold less likely to carry the DRB1*10:01 risk allele. In our study, only one of four patients with PSP-like anti-IgLON5 disease was DRB1*10:01 carrier. Perhaps the presence of the risk allele predisposes for more robust immigration of antigen-specific B-cells into the intrathecal compartment or brain. Moreover, low intrathecal anti-IgLON5 IgG production may also evade detection in CSF as anti-IgLON5 IgG may be adsorbed in brain tissue due to binding to the membrane-bound and/or shedded antigen (9).Although clinically distinct from anti-IgLON5 disease, anti-LGI1 AIE equally presents with IgG4 predominance of the target-specific IgG, low titers of target-specific antibodies in CSF compared to serum and largely non-inflammatory CSF results (14, 41, and 42) (41). Of note, not only could clonal expansion of B cells in anti-LGI1 AIE be demonstrated but also that B cells producing LGI1-specific antibodies are present in the CSF (42, 43). Correspondingly, abundant CSF B cells and even plasma cells have been found in most cases with anti-IgLON5 disease (13). These observations might indicate that target-specific recruitment of B cells to the intrathecal compartment with subsequent expansion might be a characteristic of IgG4-predominant autoimmune disorders. In contrast, recruitment of unspecific B cells with production of polyspecific antibodies including multiple anti-viral specificities associated with a robust quantitative IS of total IgG was demonstrated to be a hallmark of AIE with NMDAR antibodies (14, 44), which are largely of the IgG1 and IgG3 subclass. Thus, future experiments should focus on the comparative studies of peripheral and CSF B cells as well as the binding specificity, avidity, affinity and post-translational modifications of target-specific IgG4 produced in both compartments to unravel the relevance of intrathecally produced anti-IgLON5 IgG4.Which is the best treatment choice for anti-IgLON5 disease? In our small cohort, we observed favorable outcomes mostly after immunosuppressive treatment in combination, which consisted of RTX or IVIG in combination with Aza or CS, or combinations including Aza. However, the number of study participants was low; therefore, further studies are necessary to confirm this observation. Taken together, our findings clearly indicate an urgent need for further studies to investigate the efficacy of combination therapies, particularly involving IVIG or RTX in combination with Aza and CS.LimitationsAnti-IgLON5 disease is rare and no guidelines for treatment of anti-IgLON5 disease exist. Thus, our cohort included a limited number of patients with heterogenous treatment regimens. This limits the conclusions that can be drawn from our data. Flow cytometry is a quantitative method, and individual titrations showed linearity of the assay in general, but a high degree of inter-assay variability could not be entirely overcome by normalization. We used four different IgG-subclass–specific secondary antibodies, but these were also used successfully in diseases with IgG1 predominance (45, 46). We decided to measure anti-IgLON5 IgG1/4 at a low dilution to allow detection of low antibody levels, accepting that in exceptional cases with very high antibody levels serum anti-IgLON5 IgG4 levels may exceed the linear range of the assay. We thus optimized the assay to allow a direct comparison of CSF and serum antibody levels and demonstrated that this approach is quantitative, though sensitivity was reduced in patients with very low antibody levels. ConclusionAlthough anti-IgLON5 disease is rare and the retrospective nature of our study made it difficult to compare results, we present several important findings and hypotheses: (1) intrathecal synthesis of anti-IgLON5 IgG4 may be of clinical and prognostic relevance, as we observed IgLON5-specific IS in all five tested patients (of which four were DRB1*10:01 positive). Further, CSF (but not serum) anti-IgLON5 IgG4 levels correlated with clinical outcomes whereby low CSF levels preceded clinical improvement. (2) Initial observations suggest a potential clinical benefit from combined immunotherapy, as we found that immunotherapy was associated with reduced anti-IgLON5 antibody levels, and combination therapy had greater effect on clinical outcomes. Further studies will be necessary to ascertain our observations in a larger patient cohort.