4. Materials and Methods4.1. MaterialsThe fifty women participating in the study were divided into 3 groups: RSA, pregnant, and non-pregnant.All women participating in our study were investigated regarding age, weight, height, number of miscarriages before 12 and 16 weeks of pregnancy, prodromal symptoms of pregnancy (vomiting, nausea, and breast pain), medical procedures before and during pregnancy, administration of vitamins or dietary supplements before and during pregnancy, administration of folic acid 6 weeks before pregnancy, usage of hormonal contraception, and fertility treatment. Additionally, we collected and compared data about the most common chronic diseases such as diabetes, endometriosis, insulin resistance, Hashimoto disease, and polycystic ovary syndrome. The data are presented in Table 1. 4.1.1. Non-Pregnant Multiparous WomenThe control group consisted of 10 fertile, non-pregnant women without disorders in their obstetric-gynecological and internal medicine history. All women in the control group have had at least one childbirth without complication, and all subjects declared a normal course of pregnancy and delivery. None of the women in the control group had miscarriages in the past. In addition, none of them have been treated for any internal disorders.4.1.2. Pregnant WomenThe pregnancy group consisted of 20 pregnant women. All patients included in the group were maximally at 12 weeks of pregnancy. Patients had ultrasonographic examinations according to Fetal Medicine Foundation standards and blood tests were performed to confirm normal course of pregnancy. 4.1.3. Recurrent Spontaneous Abortion (RSA) WomenRecurrent pregnancy loss was defined as two or more consecutive spontaneous miscarriages before the 20th week of gestation. A total of 20 patients undergoing subsequent pregnancy loss were included in the study group. All samples were collected within 72 h after miscarriage. Patients with anatomic, genetic, microbiological, immunological, and hormonal causes of abortion were excluded from the research. 4.2. Sample Isolation and PreparationBlood was collected into heparin tubes. Subsequently, blood was mixed in a 1:2 proportion by volume with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). Then, the mixtures were laid slowly on the surface of the Histopaque-1077 (Merck & Co., Inc., Kenilworth, NJ, USA) in 15 mL centrifuge tubes and centrifuged at 800× g for 20 min at room temperature. The cells from the interphase were harvested and washed in PBS (Corning, NJ, USA), 600× g, for 10 min at room temperature. The washing step was repeated twice. Then cells were suspended in RPMI 1640 medium with stable glutamine (Biowest, Nuaillé, France) enriched with 10% heat-inactivated human serum (Merck & Co., Inc., Kenilworth, NJ, USA), antibiotic–antimycotic solution 100 I.U., penicillin, 100 µg/mL Streptomycin, and 0.25 µg/mL Amphotericin (Corning, NJ, USA).4.3. Flow Cytometry StainingAfter gradient isolation, 1 × 106 cells were transferred to 12 × 75 mm tubes (Becton, Dickinson and Company, NJ, USA). Cells were suspended and washed in 1 mL PBS with 0.01% sodium azide (NaN3, Merck, NG, USA) by centrifugation at 600× g for 10 min at room temperature. Then, cells were suspended in 100 µL PBS with 0.01% NaN3, and 1st-step staining with antibodies against surface antigens was performed (Table 2). All antibodies were titrated before the experiment. Cells were stained for 15 min in the dark. After the 1st step, stained cells were washed in 1ml of PBS with 0.01% NaN3 and centrifuged at 600× g for 10 min at room temperature. After washing, cells were suspended in 400 µL 0.01% NaN3PBS and vortexed. Next, cells were divided equally (250 µL) into 4 FACS tubes. The 1st tube was the FMO control, the 2nd tube was additionally stained with anti-PD1 and anti-TIM-3 antibodies, the 3rd tube was stained with anti-LAG-3 antibodies, and the 4th tube was stained with anti-TIGIT and anti-VISTA antibodies (Table 3). Then, cells were incubated for 15 min in the dark at room temperature. Finally, cells were washed with 1 mL of 0.01% NaN3PBS and centrifuged at 600× g for 10 min at room temperature. After washing, cells were suspended in 150 µL of 0.01% NaN3PBS and prepared for acquisition. Acquisition and data analysis were performed with the flow cytometry method (FACS Canto II) and Diva 6.0 software, Figures SD1 and SD2 (please refer to Supplementary Data). 4.4. Statistical AnalysisBased on data from the literature indicating that the expression of immune-regulating molecules in the general population ranges between 40–60%, we assumed an average expression of Mi1 = 50%. Power analysis for the hypothesis that the mean expression Mi2 in the population of women with recurrent miscarriages falls between 30–50% (Mi2 = 40%) was conducted. The alternative hypothesis assumes that Mi1 ≤ Mi2, with a significance level (alpha error) of 0.05 and a standard deviation (Sigma) of 15%. For the predicted test power of 0.8, the sample size N was calculated to be 20 individuals per group. Therefore, a sample size of 20 individuals per group seems justified given the pilot nature of the project.Statistical analyses were performed with Graph Pad Prism 8.4.1 GraphPad Software, Boston, MA, USA and the results were shown as mean plus/minus the standard deviation (SD). The Gaussian distribution was determined with the Shapiro–Wilk test. The analyses between sets of data with Gaussian distribution were performed by considering the F test. For groups with the same SD, an unpaired t-test was used. For groups with different SDs, an unpaired T-test with Welch’s correction was used. The analyses between groups without Gaussian distribution were performed with the Mann–Whitney test. p-values below 0.05, (p < 0.05) were considered as statistically significant and marked on the graphs as *—a star.The odds ratio was calculated using SPSS 29 software for multiparameter logistic regression, where Group A represents RSA patients and Group B represents the control groups (including both pregnant and non-pregnant women). The odds ratio is reported as Exp (B), along with the Wald statistic for 1 degree of freedom (df) and the corresponding statistical significance. The odds ratio was given with a 95% confidence interval. 4.1. MaterialsThe fifty women participating in the study were divided into 3 groups: RSA, pregnant, and non-pregnant.All women participating in our study were investigated regarding age, weight, height, number of miscarriages before 12 and 16 weeks of pregnancy, prodromal symptoms of pregnancy (vomiting, nausea, and breast pain), medical procedures before and during pregnancy, administration of vitamins or dietary supplements before and during pregnancy, administration of folic acid 6 weeks before pregnancy, usage of hormonal contraception, and fertility treatment. Additionally, we collected and compared data about the most common chronic diseases such as diabetes, endometriosis, insulin resistance, Hashimoto disease, and polycystic ovary syndrome. The data are presented in Table 1. 4.1.1. Non-Pregnant Multiparous WomenThe control group consisted of 10 fertile, non-pregnant women without disorders in their obstetric-gynecological and internal medicine history. All women in the control group have had at least one childbirth without complication, and all subjects declared a normal course of pregnancy and delivery. None of the women in the control group had miscarriages in the past. In addition, none of them have been treated for any internal disorders.4.1.2. Pregnant WomenThe pregnancy group consisted of 20 pregnant women. All patients included in the group were maximally at 12 weeks of pregnancy. Patients had ultrasonographic examinations according to Fetal Medicine Foundation standards and blood tests were performed to confirm normal course of pregnancy. 4.1.3. Recurrent Spontaneous Abortion (RSA) WomenRecurrent pregnancy loss was defined as two or more consecutive spontaneous miscarriages before the 20th week of gestation. A total of 20 patients undergoing subsequent pregnancy loss were included in the study group. All samples were collected within 72 h after miscarriage. Patients with anatomic, genetic, microbiological, immunological, and hormonal causes of abortion were excluded from the research. 4.4. Statistical AnalysisBased on data from the literature indicating that the expression of immune-regulating molecules in the general population ranges between 40–60%, we assumed an average expression of Mi1 = 50%. Power analysis for the hypothesis that the mean expression Mi2 in the population of women with recurrent miscarriages falls between 30–50% (Mi2 = 40%) was conducted. The alternative hypothesis assumes that Mi1 ≤ Mi2, with a significance level (alpha error) of 0.05 and a standard deviation (Sigma) of 15%. For the predicted test power of 0.8, the sample size N was calculated to be 20 individuals per group. Therefore, a sample size of 20 individuals per group seems justified given the pilot nature of the project.Statistical analyses were performed with Graph Pad Prism 8.4.1 GraphPad Software, Boston, MA, USA and the results were shown as mean plus/minus the standard deviation (SD). The Gaussian distribution was determined with the Shapiro–Wilk test. The analyses between sets of data with Gaussian distribution were performed by considering the F test. For groups with the same SD, an unpaired t-test was used. For groups with different SDs, an unpaired T-test with Welch’s correction was used. The analyses between groups without Gaussian distribution were performed with the Mann–Whitney test. p-values below 0.05, (p < 0.05) were considered as statistically significant and marked on the graphs as *—a star.The odds ratio was calculated using SPSS 29 software for multiparameter logistic regression, where Group A represents RSA patients and Group B represents the control groups (including both pregnant and non-pregnant women). The odds ratio is reported as Exp (B), along with the Wald statistic for 1 degree of freedom (df) and the corresponding statistical significance. The odds ratio was given with a 95% confidence interval.