MethodsBlood and saliva from children undergoing upper endoscopy were analyzed for biomarkers, including absolute eosinophil count (AEC), eosinophil‐derived neurotoxin (EDN), total and specific IgG4‐antibodies (sIgG4), specific IgE‐antibodies (sIgE) and 15‐hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid (15(S)‐HETE). Some patients participated twice, forming a longitudinal cohort. The ability to use the biomarkers to predict the EoE diagnosis was evaluated. 2METHODS & MATERIALS2.1Study participantsThis cohort study with prospective data recruited children up to the age of 18 years undergoing EGD due to suspected EoE, follow‐up of known EoE, or other upper gastroenterological issues. Some children repeatedly performed EGD. The participants were recruited at Sachs Children and Youth Hospital, Stockholm, between February 2019 and October 2021. All EGD examinations were performed under general anesthesia. From each patient, four to six biopsies were extracted from different locations of the esophagus as recommended by international guidelines 14 and sent for regular pathologic‐anatomic diagnosis (PAD). Saliva and blood was collected prior to anesthesia and the collection occured between 8 am to noon. All children were fasting according to routine, with no food for 6 h and only clear liquids (water or juice, not milk) allowed up to 2 h before the examination and then sample collections.All patients responded to standardized questions (Appendix) regarding allergic, asthma, eczema, or other diseases as well as current medications. In addition, participants also answered whether they excluded anything from their diet.2.2Blood analysesVenous blood were collected in vacutainer tubes (Becton, Dickinson, UK ref nr 368,498, 369,623 and 367,862). Analysis of peripheral AEC was performed the day of sampling at the Karolinska University Laboratory (Stockholm, Sweden). For analyses of other biomarkers, the tubes were left at room temperature (RT) for 60 min, centrifuged at 900 rpm at RT for 10 min, whereafter serum and plasma were collected and stored at −80°C pending further analyses. Samples were batch analyzed by ELISA using commercial kits according to manufacturer's instructions for: EDN (ImmunoCAP™ EDN Assay Kit, Article # 10–9545‐05, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Uppsala, Sweden) (measuring range; 2–200 μg/mL), 15(S)‐HETE ELISA kit (Catalog # 534721, Cayman Chem, Ann Arbor, MI, USA) (detection limit (range); 78 pg/mL (78–10,000 pg/mL)). Specific IgE‐antibodies (sIgE‐ab) specific for milk, egg white, wheat, birch pollen, and timothy pollen were measured by ImmunoCap® (Thermo Fisher Scientific, levels >0.1 kUA/l were considered positive). IgG4‐antibodies (IgG4‐ab) specific for peanut (peanut‐extract and Ara h 2), milk proteins (Bos d 8, Bos d 5, Bos d 4), egg white, soy, birch pollen, and gliadin from wheat were measured by ImmunoCAP sIgG4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, levels >0.07 mg/L were considered positive). Total IgG4 (tIgG4) was measured using research modification of the ImmunoCap assay as for IgG4‐ab with the difference that the ImmunoCAP IgA/IgG Calibrator tests (AGcal) were able to bind all immunoglobulins were used instead of specific allergen tests.2.3Saliva analysesThe patients provided saliva samples before anesthesia by holding a synthetic swab in the mouth until it was soaked with saliva, which took approximately 1 min and contained between 0.37–2 mL. The swab was then placed in a saliva tube (Salivette, Sarstedt, ref nr. 1,534,500) and centrifuged at 3000 rpm, at RT for 5 min, and stored at −80°C pending analyses. For analysis of 15(S)‐HETE and tIgG4 in saliva, the same procedure and manufacturers instructions as for serum were used.2.4Ethical approvalThe study was approved by the Regional Ethical Review Board of Stockholm (D‐nr 2017/744–31). Informed written consent was obtained from patients. For children less than 15 years of age, both guardians gave approval before inclusion in the study.2.5StatisticsDemographic information and baseline characteristics are presented as numbers and percentages. Comparisons among the groups, active EoE, EoE in remission and healthy individuals, were conducted using ANOVA, Pearson's Chi‐squared test, and Kruskal‐Wallis rank sum test when applicable. The association between EoE groups (active vs. healthy, active vs. remission) and biomarkers was assessed through multinomial logistic regression. The selection of adjusted covariates was based on principal component regression (Figure S1).Random Forest (RF) models were constructed to evaluate the predictive performance of all biomarkers in distinguishing between the patient groups. RF function, available in the R package randomForest, was employed with the generation of 10,000 trees. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis, allowing for the calculation of the area under the curve (AUC), was performed based on RF modeling. Cutoff value for each parameter was based on the threshold level in RF when the sum of sensitivity and specificity was the largest. For longitudinal data, the Wilcoxon matched‐pairs signed‐rank test was employed. Statistical significance was defined as a p‐value <.05. The analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism version 10.1.0 (GraphPad Software, San Diego, California, USA) and R version 4.3.1. 2.1Study participantsThis cohort study with prospective data recruited children up to the age of 18 years undergoing EGD due to suspected EoE, follow‐up of known EoE, or other upper gastroenterological issues. Some children repeatedly performed EGD. The participants were recruited at Sachs Children and Youth Hospital, Stockholm, between February 2019 and October 2021. All EGD examinations were performed under general anesthesia. From each patient, four to six biopsies were extracted from different locations of the esophagus as recommended by international guidelines 14 and sent for regular pathologic‐anatomic diagnosis (PAD). Saliva and blood was collected prior to anesthesia and the collection occured between 8 am to noon. All children were fasting according to routine, with no food for 6 h and only clear liquids (water or juice, not milk) allowed up to 2 h before the examination and then sample collections.All patients responded to standardized questions (Appendix) regarding allergic, asthma, eczema, or other diseases as well as current medications. In addition, participants also answered whether they excluded anything from their diet. 3.6Longitudinal analysis of treatment responseAmong the patients diagnosed with EoE, 20 children were examined on multiple occasions, as the disease was monitored, using repeated EGDs. The median time between visits was 4 months. During this time, a total of 11 patients changed from active to remission due to successful treatments. The serum levels of EDN, tIgG4, sIgG4 to Bos d 4, Bos d 5, Bos d 8, gliadin, and to birch pollen, and sIgE to milk decreased significantly from active to remission (p <.05), Figure 3. No differences were found in saliva analyses. Furthermore, in the nine patients who did not enter remission at the second EGD, no significant differences were detected in any biomarker compared to the first visit.FIGURE 3Logitudinal analysis of treatment response following EoE patients tramsgressing from active to remissive state. Data represent actual measurement at two separate occasions with a connective line for each different patient. *p <.05, **p <.05 and ***p <.001.