BackgroundElevated intake of omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids is linked to a reduced risk of dementia in some prospective studies. However, few studies have examined the relationship between nutrient intake and plasma biomarkers of Alzheimer's disease. 1IntroductionAccumulating evidence suggests the importance of dietary factors in preventing Alzheimer's disease (AD) . Polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) stand out for their critical roles in brain structure and function and their consistent association with reduced risk of AD in epidemiological studies [, , ]. Individuals with higher dietary intake of omega-3 (O-3) PUFAs, found most richly in fish and seafood , are less likely to develop cognitive decline and AD in observational studies [, , , ], including ours . These associations raise the question of whether these key nutrients slow the progression of AD pathophysiology in the preclinical phase, when individuals may derive the greatest benefit from targeted lifestyle modifications. In AD, changes in the brain reflected in body fluid biomarkers, or increased amyloid burden on positron emission tomography (PET), may precede cognitive impairment by as many as 15 years [, , ].Blood-based biomarkers provide an accessible way to identify individuals at risk of developing AD in large cohorts , and they allow for serial measurements tracking the accumulation of AD pathology over time . As such, blood-based biomarkers may provide insight into the relationship between diet and the progression of AD pathophysiology before symptom onset. However, the association between dietary fatty acid intake and AD biomarkers, especially blood-based biomarkers, has been evaluated in few studies so far [, , , , , ].We chose to evaluate whether high intake of key nutrients from food would predict a lesser change in plasma AD biomarkers over time in participants of a multi-ethnic cohort of older adults who were dementia-free at baseline. We included dietary intake of O-3 and omega-6 (O-6) PUFAs and monounsaturated fatty acids (MUFAs) measured at baseline. We included phosphorylated tau 181 (P-tau181), amyloid beta (Aβ) 42/40 ratio, P-tau181/Aβ42 ratio, neurofilament light chain (NfL) and glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) as AD-related biomarkers. We also included the first two biomarker patterns previously derived from principal component analysis (PCA1, PCA2) of the latter four biomarkers . The PCA1 pattern has elevated NfL and GFAP, reflecting neurodegeneration and neuroinflammation, while the PCA2 pattern contains elevated Aβ42/40 and low P-tau181/Aβ42, and thus is more AD-specific . In the prior study, individuals who developed dementia or MCI had faster decrease in PCA2 score compared to those who remained cognitively normal during follow-up . We hypothesized that individuals with the highest relative O-3, O-6 and MUFA intake would have lesser progression of AD pathophysiology over time reflected in biomarker levels.To evaluate whether a reduced burden of cardiovascular disease mediated the association, we included a final model adjusting for a cardio-cerebrovascular risk factor (CVRF) score. This score was previously derived in our cohort based on body mass index and history of heart disease, hypertension and diabetes. We performed a secondary analysis using individual O-3 fatty acids, including eicosapentaenoic (EPA), docosapentaenoic acid (DPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA).