4. ConclusionsIn this study, the detection of the CD44 cancer biomarker under dynamic conditions was reported using a single-mode optical fiber ball resonator biosensor. The goal of this work was to develop and assess a biosensing platform that is both economical and simple to produce, with the ability to detect a specific cancer biomarker of interest, such as the CD44 protein in real-time. The method for fabricating the sensor is both cost-efficient and time-effective, taking only five minutes, thanks to the use of cost-effective SMF-28 optical fiber, which is widely used in telecommunications. The primary objective of the study is to establish a link between laboratory settings and clinical procedures by replicating physiological variables, including blood circulation. The constructed optical fiber ball resonator biosensors were shown to be insensitive to changes in pressure and highly specific to CD44 protein. While mimicking intravenous biomarker detection it was important to examine pressure sensitivity as changes in pressure can significantly affect the detection process potentially masking biomarker signals. The fabricated sensors didn’t show sensitivity to pressure changes. Additionally, changes in protein concentration allow for almost instantaneous detection, emphasizing its potential for real-time tracking applications. Placement of the sensor inside the tube/catheter of the sensor inside the packaging was studied in more detail in this study and optimal position was chosen which didn’t create artefact during protein measurement. The packaging of the biosensor was also enhanced to improve its applicability in two ways: (1) allowed the sensor to be in contact with the fluid (and therefore biomarker); (2) kept the sensor from breaking. The proposed packaging, validated in a flowing system, did not introduce any measurement artefact while maintaining the capability for resolving concentrations of CD44. The results indicate a femtomolar detection limit when using a ball resonator that has at least 496 μm in diameter. AFM measurements were also performed to track the surface morphology of the biosensor during its various functionalization stages. The AFM data further support the sensor’s extreme sensitivity by showing a considerable shift in height but no change in surface roughness after detection. The specificity of the biosensor has been further confirmed by control studies with thrombin and gamma-globulin since no significant changes in the signal were seen in the presence of these proteins. Given that the performance of sensors might be compromised under flow settings, it is an important accomplishment to demonstrate in dynamic conditions a good reaction to the target molecule or protein with minimal signal to other proteins present in the bloodstream . In situ detection of soluble CD44 biomarker in blood-mimicking conditions could be considered as a significant step forward towards building clinical devices able to detect biomarkers in blood flow.