7CLINICAL TRIAL DESIGN AND ENROLLMENT IN STUDIES OF TAUOPATHIESSuccessfully addressing tauopathies requires the capability to confirm the biological disease diagnosis, drawing lessons from anti‐amyloid trials. 126 Although specific biomarkers for primary tauopathies remain lacking, recent advances offer promise for differentiating between different tauopathies 99 and tracking tau tangle accumulation in the brain. 100 Notably, early‐phase trials targeting tau in AD have demonstrated measurable biological changes. For example, BIIB080, an antisense oligonucleotide targeting the MAPT transcript gene, has shown a dose‐dependent sustained reduction in tau levels in CSF, 127 which is associated with reduced tau burden in the brain. 128 Furthermore, while the dominant approach in tau‐targeted therapy currently involves immunotherapy, the precise tau epitope to target remains under investigation. Recent evidence suggests the potential significance of targeting seed‐competent tau. Promising interim results from tau immunotherapy (E2814) targeting two sites of the MTBR 129 highlights the potential for second‐generation anti‐tau monoclonal antibodies, building on the growing understanding of tau pathophysiology.A possible strategy for tackling tauopathies, particularly in AD, involves the joint targeting of both Aβ plaque and tau tangle pathology. The temporal links between the onset of Aβ plaques and the initial increase in p‐tau suggest important mechanistic links between these two proteinopathies in AD. 97 , 98 While evidence suggests that neuritic Aβ plaques can trigger tauopathy in AD, recent trials of effective amyloid‐lowering therapies have not resulted in a robust decrease of tau PET signals, which is principally a marker of neurofibrillary tangle burden. 130 , 131 , 132 This implies that a dual approach targeting both Aβ plaque and tau tangles may be more effective in AD but requires robust clinical trial evidence. The recent approvals of anti‐amyloid immunotherapies 131 , 132 , 133 present both pragmatic and mechanistic grounds for considering such dual (or concurrent) amyloid/tau clinical trials. Leveraging the natural history and clinical trial data of gantenerumab (anti‐aggregated amyloid immunotherapy, ClinicalTrials.gov number NCT04623242) and solanezumab (anti‐monomeric amyloid immunotherapy, ClinicalTrials.gov number NCT04623242), the Dominantly Inherited Alzheimer's Network Trials Unit (DIAN‐TU) platform has recently developed a dual‐therapy trial targeting both amyloid and tau (ClinicalTrials.gov number NCT05269394). This trial utilizes both soluble (CSF and plasma) and aggregated biomarkers (tau PET), enabling researchers to account for amyloid‐lowering effects on specific soluble tau biomarkers and use the stage of the disease to assess tau‐monotherapy and sequential amyloid/tau therapies on disease‐related biomarkers. The DIAN‐TU platform serves as a model for international collaborative platform trials in genetic AD, 134 producing groundbreaking results in secondary prevention.Addressing rare tauopathies such as MAPT‐FTD necessitates international collaboration to build sufficiently large cohorts for effective drug trials. One example is the FTD Prevention Initiative, which has been instrumental in building trial‐ready cohorts and models of presymptomatic markers of the disease that together improve the design and feasibility of clinical trials. 135 Basket trials might also be helpful in other tauopathies, 136 where one drug is tested across multiple diseases with a shared element in pathology, increasing the efficiency of drug development by enhancing recruitment, sharing placebo groups, and enabling comparison across different tauopathies in the context of efficacy and side‐effect profiles.Finally, it should be noted that engaging participants in the co‐design of trials is critical to enhance recruitment, ensure individual support, and maintain engagement and retention throughout the lengthy and demanding trial process. The challenges unique to different tauopathies must be addressed by tailoring trial designs to meet the specific demands of each condition.In summary, refining the clinical trial design in tauopathies involves leveraging lessons from anti‐amyloid trials, utilizing evolving biomarkers for target engagement and disease modification, and considering trial platforms tailored to each tauopathy. Global collaboration coupled with participant engagement holds the keys to accelerating therapeutic advances in this devastating group of diseases, bringing us closer to meaningful clinical advancements.