3. Discussion3.1. Programmed Death Protein (PD-1) Expression on LymphocytesData connected with PD-1 expression on lymphocytes in pregnant women are scarce. Our research showed decreased expression of PD-1 on the peripheral lymphocytes of women in the RSA group. Specifically, we found decreased expression of PD-1 on T helper cells and NKT cells when compared to multiparous women and decreased expression on T helper, cytotoxic T, T regulatory, and NKT cells when compared to pregnant women. These findings are in line with the observations of Wang et al., who showed that women with RPL have immunological differences in the percentage of peripheral lymphocytes, especially Th1, Th17, and Treg cells, and that expression of PD-1 was significantly decreased . The findings suggested that women with RPL have an enhanced inflammatory immune response and decreased immune regulatory function due to altered expression of PD-1. The abnormal expression of PD-1 and PD-L1 on Th1 and Th17 cells directly involves immune imbalance at the MFI by preventing the conversion of naïve T cells into Treg cells and promoting Th17 cell survival .Meggyes et al. showed, by using flow cytometry to examine the lymphocytes of healthy pregnant women, that PD-1 expression on peripheral cytotoxic and helper T lymphocytes was decreased in the first trimester compared to non-pregnant women . However, in our findings, we did not confirm that data, which might have been explained by the smaller size of our multiparous group. The authors established that the cytotoxic activity of decidual PD-1+CD8+T cells compared to peripheral counterparts is decreased . This difference was detected only on CD8+T cells, which shows the importance of inhibiting cytotoxic T cells during pregnancy. A significant decrease in the expression of inhibitory PD-1 receptors in the first and third trimesters of pregnancy could be behind the Th1 predominance in these trimesters . They hypothesize that Th1 predominance could lead to an increase in PD-1 expression on CD8+T cells to the level seen in the second trimester. For the implementation of the PD-1-mediated inhibitory effect, the presence of the ligand molecule is also crucial. In their studies, they found a decrease in PD-L1 expression on the surface of CD4+ T and CD8+ T cells in the third trimester of pregnancy, which could affect the PD-1/PD-L1 pathway, resulting in a Th1 predominance before and during delivery . Studies performed by Wang et al. showed similar results to those performed by Maygges et al. The authors also claimed that during pregnancy, PD-1 expression on peripheral lymphocytes and NK cells is suppressed .PD-L1 expression is increased by numerous pro-inflammatory factors (LPS, GM-CSF, and VEGF) and cytokines (IFN-γ and TNF-α) . It is already known that trophoblast cells present immune checkpoint ligands on their surface. Veras et al. showed high PD-L1 expression on syncytiotrophoblasts in the early term of healthy pregnancy . Previous studies showed that the frequency of PD-1 expression in pregnant women’s peripheral T lymphocytes is elevated compared to non-pregnant women and soluble PD-L1 is increased throughout gestation . PD-L1 and PL-L2 interaction with PD-1 resulted in reduced Th1 cytokine production by CD4+ T cells, which may be beneficial for establishing pregnancy outcomes . The above-mentioned findings suggest that disturbances in PD-1 expression may lead to miscarriage and PD-1 plays an important role in maintaining the balance in maternal immune tolerance towards the fetus. 3.2. T Cell Immunoglobulin and Mucin Domain-Containing Protein (TIM-3) Expression on LymphocytesWe observed decreased expression of TIM-3 on studied peripheral lymphocytes, with the exception of NKT cells, in RSA women compared to pregnant women. Our findings are in line with Sun et al.’s results, who reported that in RSA patients, lowered expression of TIM-3 on peripheral NK cells might be connected with a decreased level of TGF-β in serum or with a lack of stimulus for TIM-3 . Research proved that TIM-3 acts as a marker of fully mature and functional NK cells. NK cells produce high amounts of cytokines and are highly cytotoxic. Gleason showed that Galectin-9 stimulation of TIM3+NK cells results in the release of a large amount of IFN-γ . Moreover, Ndhlovu et al. showed that NK cell-mediated cytotoxicity is suppressed after the interaction of TIM-3 with Gal-9 . Meggyes et al. showed that TIM-3+ NK cells and TIM-3− NK cells express different cytokine profiles in the peripheral blood of pregnant women compared to non-pregnant individuals. NK TIM-3+ cells in both non-pregnant and pregnant women have lower cytotoxic activity than NK TIM3(−) . Miko et al. observed that restraining the depression of TIM-3 on peripheral NK cells with increased NK cell activity is connected with the early onset of pregnancy loss . Miko et al.’s findings are similar to our results, where the expression of TIM-3 on NK cells is decreased in RSA women compared to pregnant women . Trophoblasts principally express Gal-9 and TIM-3 on their surfaces. Furthermore, the molecules are found in a soluble form. TIM-3/Gal-9 interaction influences both the activity and differentiation of NK cells . The data suggest that trophoblasts, via TIM-3, induce the transformation of peripheral NK cells into decidual NK cells with immunoregulatory properties . Hu et al. proposed that the TIM-3 signaling pathway was responsible for maintaining the anti-inflammatory phenotype of dNK cells towards the fetus . Moreover, dNK cells secrete cytokines and chemokines, which are responsible for spiral artery remodeling. It is plausible that TIM-3 might have a direct or indirect influence on spiral artery remodeling . Similarly, TIM-3 is expressed on decidual immune cells: CD8+, CD4+ T cells, and NK cells . TIM-3 is a ligand for Galectin-9 . IFN-γ produced by Th1 cells regulates Gal-9 expression. The interaction of TIM-3/Gal-9 prevents an excessive inflammatory immune response, initiating the anergy and apoptosis of activated T cells in the feedback loop . The results of a flow cytometry experiment by Zhuang et al. showed that the ratio of CD4+TIM3+/CD4+ cells per PBMC was significantly higher in the URSA group than in the control group . Wang et al., report that in spontaneous abortion, the number of PD-1+Tim-3+/CD4+ T cells is decreased, and their production of Th2-type cytokines is deficient . In our study, we confirmed the declined expression of PD-1 on T, NK, and NKT cells in the RSA group. Previous observations suggested that PD-1 and TIM-3 play a role in suppressing the Th1-mediated immune response during pregnancy . Studies performed in vivo in animals treated with anti-Tim-3 and anti-PD-1 antibodies showed that this treatment was highly effective in reducing proliferation and Th2-type cytokine production from decidual PD-1+Tim-3+CD4+ T cells in an experimental model of mouse pregnancy . Blockade of Tim-3 and PD-1 caused diminished Treg function and improved Th1 and Th17 activation . In contrast, the experimental results of Li et al. on RSA mice models established that manifestation of Tim-3 on T cells, as well as on placental and trophoblast cells, was higher in abortion-prone mice than in control mice . Taking into consideration that TIM-3+ cytotoxic T lymphocytes are regarded as exhausted cells with a lack of ability to clear virus and tumor cells , at the maternal–fetal interface, TIM-3+CD8+T cells do not exist as exhausted cells but show high proliferative activity with an anti-inflammatory cytokine profile . Moreover, Wang et al. found that the number of TIM-3+CD8+ T lymphocytes decreased in miscarriage patients , which coincides with our results. In addition, they report that blockade of TIM-3 in vitro results in decreased proliferation of CD8+ T cells and shifts their cytokine profile to release IFN-γ, which increases the cells’ cytotoxic capacity. The changes may cause trophoblast cell death. Additionally, Wang postulates that the microenvironment at the maternal–fetal interface, including the hormones, cytokines, growth factors, etc., secreted by decidual stromal cells and trophoblast cells, upregulates expression of TIM-3 on CD8+ and CD4+ lymphocytes . Regulatory NKT cells represent a small proportion of decidual immune cells and may control adaptive and innate immunity . Youan et al. showed that rapid and uncontrolled activation of NKT cells may lead to pregnancy loss . In our study, we discover that TIM-3 expression is the highest on NKT cells in the RSA group. Li et al. hypothesize that high levels of TIM-3 lymphocytes may result in hyperimmune responses and lead to immune rejection of the fetus .More and more current studies indicate the relationship of TIM-3 with the normal course of pregnancy. 3.3. T Cell Immunoglobulin and ITIM Domain (TIGIT) Expression on LymphocytesThere are only a few publications related to TIGIT expression on peripheral lymphocytes in pregnant women or women with RSA. Wang et al. proved that as the pregnancy progressed, the expression of TIGIT on NK cells gradually increased and conversely, TIGIT and PD-1 expression on T cells declined throughout pregnancy . Our study showed a significant increase in TIGIT percentage in NKT cells in RSA women. Meggeys et al. presented data that TIGIT competes for the ligands (CD155 and CD112) with the activator molecule for NK and NKT cells, CD226 , and they showed that the percentages of CD226+ NK and NKT cells are increased during the first trimester of pregnancy . After blocking TIGIT with an antibody, γδT cells proliferated and secreted an immunomodulatory protein, progesterone-induced blocking factor (PIBF), which facilitates immune escape and prevents embryonic rejection . These results indicate that TIGIT signaling pathways are crucial for maintaining immune tolerance toward the fetus and suggest a connection with progesterone concentration Moreover, in our study, we observed decreased expression of the TIGIT molecule on Treg cells in RSA women compared to pregnant and non-pregnant women, which is in line with results obtained by Granne et al. 3.4. V-Domain Ig-Containing Suppressor of T Cell Activation (VISTA) Expression on LymphocytesVISTA is a relatively newly discovered immune checkpoint, and its role and function are still not clear. There are no available data regarding VISTA expression on lymphocytes during pregnancy. We reveal that VISTA expression is decreased in RSA patients compared to pregnant women. Additionally, we find that NK VISTA expression on the lymphocytes of pregnant women is decreased compared to non-pregnant women. Some studies support the assumption that VISTA is an immune checkpoint receptor expressed on tumor-infiltrating T lymphocytes (TILs) and myeloid cells, leading to suppression of T cell activation, proliferation, and cytokine production . VISTA functions as a ligand and receptor, conducting coinhibitory signals and suppressing T-cell activation, proliferation, and cytokine production . Further studies revealed that VISTA interacts with V-set and Ig domain-containing 3 (VSIG3), which is highly expressed on placental tissue and potentially induces fetal tolerance . Moreover, VISTA is involved in the regulation of Th2 cell differentiation. It upregulates the expression of Foxp3 T cells and prevents Graft versus host disease (GVHD) in an experiment in a mouse model . VISTA expression on the lymphocytes of RSA patients was decreased compared to cells in pregnant women in our study, which supports this theory  Decreased expression of VISTA on CD4 and CD8 lymphocytes might be a reason for decreased tolerance and immunosuppressive activity in response to fetal antigens . Flies et al. showed that VISTA may be crucial in the prevention of GVHD induction . Flies et al. demonstrated that VISTA-/-CD4+ T cells show an increased effector response . The features of VISTA, along with its similarity to PD-1, make VISTA a target for experimental immunotherapy for pregnancy loss. Physiological pregnancy promotes a relatively immunosuppressive environment that tolerates fetal antigens .3.5. Lymphocyte Activation Gene-3 (LAG-3) Expression on LymphocytesA few ongoing studies respect the role of LAG-3 during pregnancy. Zhang et al. claim that upon engagement with MHC-Ⅱ or FGL-1, LAG-3 negatively modulates the activation, proliferation, effector function, and homeostasis of CD8+ and CD4+ T cells. LAG-3+Treg cells exhibit an effector-memory phenotype (CD45RA−CCR7−) with less proliferation capability and higher levels of anti-inflammatory cytokine production: IL-10 and TGF-β . In early human pregnancy, LAG-3+Treg cells were found in the decidua and the periphery . However, the difference was not established in pregnant and non-pregnant samples. Our data are the first to include LAG-3 expression on lymphocytes from women with RSA, which was significantly reduced in the entire population of lymphocytes studied, including T reg cells. In Madadi et al., studies on pre-eclampsia patients revealed lower protein levels of PD-1, LAG-3, CTLA-4, and TIM-3, as well as gene expression in decidual tissues, than in normal pregnant women .3.6. Potential Clinical Applications of the Findings3.6.1. Diagnostic Tool for Immune Dysregulation in RPLQuantifying ICP expression on lymphocytes from women with RPL could be developed as a diagnostic tool. By comparing the expression profiles of ICPs with those of healthy pregnant women, clinicians could identify immune profiles associated with higher risks of miscarriage.Application: Flow cytometry or immunohistochemistry could be used to measure surface and intracellular ICP expression, helping to identify women at risk for RPL due to immune imbalances.3.6.2. Personalized Immunomodulatory TherapiesOnce abnormal ICP expression patterns are identified, personalized therapeutic strategies could be designed to modulate immune responses. This might involve therapies that block or stimulate specific ICP pathways (e.g., PD-1/PD-L1 and TIGIT inhibitors or agonists) to restore immune tolerance and prevent fetal rejection.Application: Immunotherapy could be tailored to the specific ICP profile of each patient, potentially using monoclonal antibodies or small-molecule inhibitors to fine-tune immune responses.3.6.3. Monitoring of Treatment ResponseTracking ICP expression during and after treatment could serve as a biomarker for therapeutic efficacy. Patients receiving immunomodulatory therapy could have their ICP levels regularly monitored to assess whether immune tolerance is being successfully restored.Application: Serial measurement of ICP expression levels on lymphocytes throughout pregnancy could help clinicians adjust treatments dynamically, ensuring sustained immune tolerance during gestation.3.6.4. Predictive Biomarker for Pregnancy OutcomesICP expression could also be investigated as a predictive biomarker for pregnancy outcomes. Women with certain ICP profiles (e.g., low PD-1 or LAG-3 expression on T-cells) may be at higher risk for miscarriage. Early identification of these patients could lead to closer monitoring and early interventions during pregnancy.Application: Pre-pregnancy screening for ICP levels might help stratify patients by risk, guiding preventive strategies or early therapeutic interventions.3.7. Strengths and Limitations of This ResearchThis study was limited by the small number of RSA patients and multiparous and pregnant women. However, 20 women in the group were enough to obtain reliable statistical data and to confirm our findings, although further research with larger cohorts would be necessary. Although our goal was to assess a wide range of ICP expressions, recent data suggest that other ICP molecules or those lately classified as ICP molecules, e.g., OX40, also play a role in regulating fertilization, gestation, and human embryo development. A comprehensive analysis of various ICPs, including surface, soluble, and gene expression, in conjunction with cytokine correlations and the function of immune cells, could offer new insights into the issue of recurrent pregnancy loss.4. Materials and Methods 5. ConclusionsThe provided data indicate immunological differences between women during pregnancy, after miscarriage, and in multiparous women. The most remarkable features of lymphocytes in RSA women were diminished expression of PD-1 and LAG-3 on T (Th and Tc), Treg, NK, and NKT cells and impaired expression of TIM-3 and VISTA on CD8 cytotoxic T and NK cells, with accompanying increased expression of TIGIT and TIM-3 on NKT cells. Our analysis confirmed the magnitude of the roles of PD-1 and TIM-3 in RSA and particularly emphasizes the role of LAG-3. One should not underestimate the role of TIGIT and VISTA in impairing the regulatory activity of CD8 cytotoxic and NKT cells. Future research on decidual immune cells concerning the above-mentioned ICPs will add further insight into the role of biomolecules in recurrent pregnancy loss.