MethodsIn this post hoc analysis of the NORD-STAR trial, 296 newly diagnosed patients starting methotrexate with glucocorticoids, certolizumab pegol, abatacept or tocilizumab were included. Serum PCSK9 and LDL-cholesterol levels were measured at baseline and 24 weeks. Linear regression models were used to analyse the difference in PCSK9 and LDL cholesterol between glucocorticoid and bDMARD treatments at 24 weeks. In the second analysis, the interactions between the treatment groups and autoantibody status were added to the model. MethodsStudy design and participantsNORD-STAR (EudraCT2011-004720-35, NCT01491815) was a multicentre, investigator-initiated blinded-assessor, phase 4, randomised controlled trial of early RA (symptom duration<24 months), conducted in Sweden, Denmark, Norway, Finland, the Netherlands, and Iceland. Newly diagnosed DMARD-naïve patients (n=812), fulfilling the 2010 American College of Rheumatology/European Alliance of Associations for Rheumatology classification criteria for RA, aged 18 years or older, with moderate to severe disease activity (disease activity score of 28 joints, based on C reactive protein (DAS28-CRP)>3.2), and with ACPA, or RF positivity, or increased C reactive protein (≥10 mg/L) or a combination of the above were enrolled. Key exclusion criteria were administration of intra-articular or parenteral glucocorticoids in the preceding 4 weeks, a dose of oral glucocorticoids (or equivalent) >7.5 mg/day or a dose change within the preceding 4 weeks, poorly controlled medical condition, such as uncontrolled diabetes, unstable heart disease and congestive heart failure. The primary NORD-STAR analysis was performed on the intention-to-treat population. The per-protocol population excluded participants with major protocol deviations as outlined in the previously published 24 weeks NORD-STAR statistical analysis plan.23 In this substudy, we included Swedish per-protocol patients who had sufficient volume of serum available for the PCSK9 laboratory analysis and were not using statins at baseline or at 24 weeks.RandomisationPatients were randomly assigned in a 1:1:1:1 ratio, stratified by country, ACPA status and sex into one of the four treatment groups.Group 1 received methotrexate plus oral prednisolone (tapered from 20 to 5 mg per day within 9 weeks, discontinued at week 36).Group 2 received methotrexate plus certolizumab pegol (200 mg subcutaneously administered every other week (loading dose 400 mg at 0, 2 and 4 weeks).Group 3 received methotrexate plus abatacept (125mg subcutaneously administered every week).Group 4 received methotrexate plus tocilizumab (8 mg/kg intravenously administered every 4 weeks or 162 mg subcutaneously administered every week).Oral glucocorticoids were not allowed in bDMARD treatment groups. However, short-term administration of glucocorticoids for acute medical conditions other than RA was permitted. Intra-articular glucocorticoid injections were allowed when clinically indicated, but not 4 weeks before the 24-week visit. Details have been previously published.23 24ProceduresLaboratory measuresSerum samples were obtained at baseline and at 24 weeks after initiation of the randomised treatment and stored at −80 °C until analysis.PCSK9 levels were determined by a commercial ELISA kit (R&D Systems, UK) as per manufacturer’s instructions. The assay range of ELISA was 125.0–8000 pg/mL. A 100-fold dilution was performed on the samples to ensure they align with the specified range.Analyses of total cholesterol, high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol and triglycerides were performed at Amsterdam University Medical Centres laboratory. LDL cholesterol was calculated by the laboratory using Friedewald’s formula ((LDL cholesterol) = (total cholesterol) − (HDL cholesterol) −(triglycerides)/2.2 in mmol/L).25 Assay ranges were as follows: total cholesterol 0.1–20.7 mmol/L, HDL cholesterol 0.08–3.88 mmol/L and triglycerides 0.1–10.0 mmol/L.ACPA and RF were measured using the EliA (immunoglobulin G and immunoglobulin M) methods on a Phadia 250 instrument from ThermoFisher Scientific (Freiburg, Germany https://www.thermofisher.com/phadia/wo/en/our-solutions/elia-autoimmunity-solutions/rheumatoid-arthritis.html) according to suppliers’ instructions. RF positivity was defined as a concentration of greater than 5 IU/mL and ACPA positivity as a concentration of greater than 10 U/mL.ANA test was done at local certified laboratories and results (positive or negative) were recorded in the NORD-STAR Case Report Forms.Statistical analysisBaseline characteristics are presented as proportions for categorical variables, as means (SD) for normally distributed continuous variables or as medians (IQR) for non-normally distributed continuous variables.In the first analysis, a linear regression model was used to assess the effect of RA treatments on PCSK9 levels at 24 weeks. The model included PCSK9 levels at baseline as a covariate to adjust for baseline differences. The treatment variable was included in the model, with glucocorticoid treatment as the reference for each of the three different bDMARD treatments. The same linear regression analysis was applied to assess LDL cholesterol at 24 weeks, adjusting for LDL-cholesterol levels at baseline.In the second analysis, we combined the three bDMARD treatments into one group and conducted the same analysis.To investigate whether the influence of glucocorticoids and bDMARD treatments on PCSK9 levels at 24 weeks was different in the presence of autoantibodies (RF, ACPA or ANA), interaction between treatment and autoantibody status was added to the linear regression model. The same analysis method was applied for LDL-cholesterol assessment.To estimate the association between LDL cholesterol and PCSK9 over time (between baseline and 24 weeks), a linear mixed model analysis was used with LDL cholesterol as outcome. First, we analysed the relationship on average over time and, second, the relationship at baseline and at 24 weeks. In the first analysis, the treatment and time variables were included in the model. In the latter analysis, treatment and an interaction between PCSK9 and time were added to the model.Besides crude analyses, all analyses were also adjusted for sex, age, BMI, DAS28-CRP, ACPA and RF at baseline. Normality of the residuals of all analyses was evaluated by visual inspection.The statistical analysis was done using Stata (V.18) and SPSS (V.28). GraphPad Prism (V.10) and BioRender were used to create the figures.The NORD-STAR trial is registered with EudraCT (2011-004720-35) and ClinicalTrials.gov (NCT01491815).FundingInger Bendix Foundation for Medical Research contributed to the funding of the cholesterol analysis for this study.Role of the funding sourceFunding sources of this study and the NORD-STAR investigator-initiated trial had no role in study design, collection, analysis and interpretation of data, in the writing of the report or in the decision to submit for publication. Study design and participantsNORD-STAR (EudraCT2011-004720-35, NCT01491815) was a multicentre, investigator-initiated blinded-assessor, phase 4, randomised controlled trial of early RA (symptom duration<24 months), conducted in Sweden, Denmark, Norway, Finland, the Netherlands, and Iceland. Newly diagnosed DMARD-naïve patients (n=812), fulfilling the 2010 American College of Rheumatology/European Alliance of Associations for Rheumatology classification criteria for RA, aged 18 years or older, with moderate to severe disease activity (disease activity score of 28 joints, based on C reactive protein (DAS28-CRP)>3.2), and with ACPA, or RF positivity, or increased C reactive protein (≥10 mg/L) or a combination of the above were enrolled. Key exclusion criteria were administration of intra-articular or parenteral glucocorticoids in the preceding 4 weeks, a dose of oral glucocorticoids (or equivalent) >7.5 mg/day or a dose change within the preceding 4 weeks, poorly controlled medical condition, such as uncontrolled diabetes, unstable heart disease and congestive heart failure. The primary NORD-STAR analysis was performed on the intention-to-treat population. The per-protocol population excluded participants with major protocol deviations as outlined in the previously published 24 weeks NORD-STAR statistical analysis plan.23 In this substudy, we included Swedish per-protocol patients who had sufficient volume of serum available for the PCSK9 laboratory analysis and were not using statins at baseline or at 24 weeks. ProceduresLaboratory measuresSerum samples were obtained at baseline and at 24 weeks after initiation of the randomised treatment and stored at −80 °C until analysis.PCSK9 levels were determined by a commercial ELISA kit (R&D Systems, UK) as per manufacturer’s instructions. The assay range of ELISA was 125.0–8000 pg/mL. A 100-fold dilution was performed on the samples to ensure they align with the specified range.Analyses of total cholesterol, high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol and triglycerides were performed at Amsterdam University Medical Centres laboratory. LDL cholesterol was calculated by the laboratory using Friedewald’s formula ((LDL cholesterol) = (total cholesterol) − (HDL cholesterol) −(triglycerides)/2.2 in mmol/L).25 Assay ranges were as follows: total cholesterol 0.1–20.7 mmol/L, HDL cholesterol 0.08–3.88 mmol/L and triglycerides 0.1–10.0 mmol/L.ACPA and RF were measured using the EliA (immunoglobulin G and immunoglobulin M) methods on a Phadia 250 instrument from ThermoFisher Scientific (Freiburg, Germany https://www.thermofisher.com/phadia/wo/en/our-solutions/elia-autoimmunity-solutions/rheumatoid-arthritis.html) according to suppliers’ instructions. RF positivity was defined as a concentration of greater than 5 IU/mL and ACPA positivity as a concentration of greater than 10 U/mL.ANA test was done at local certified laboratories and results (positive or negative) were recorded in the NORD-STAR Case Report Forms. Statistical analysisBaseline characteristics are presented as proportions for categorical variables, as means (SD) for normally distributed continuous variables or as medians (IQR) for non-normally distributed continuous variables.In the first analysis, a linear regression model was used to assess the effect of RA treatments on PCSK9 levels at 24 weeks. The model included PCSK9 levels at baseline as a covariate to adjust for baseline differences. The treatment variable was included in the model, with glucocorticoid treatment as the reference for each of the three different bDMARD treatments. The same linear regression analysis was applied to assess LDL cholesterol at 24 weeks, adjusting for LDL-cholesterol levels at baseline.In the second analysis, we combined the three bDMARD treatments into one group and conducted the same analysis.To investigate whether the influence of glucocorticoids and bDMARD treatments on PCSK9 levels at 24 weeks was different in the presence of autoantibodies (RF, ACPA or ANA), interaction between treatment and autoantibody status was added to the linear regression model. The same analysis method was applied for LDL-cholesterol assessment.To estimate the association between LDL cholesterol and PCSK9 over time (between baseline and 24 weeks), a linear mixed model analysis was used with LDL cholesterol as outcome. First, we analysed the relationship on average over time and, second, the relationship at baseline and at 24 weeks. In the first analysis, the treatment and time variables were included in the model. In the latter analysis, treatment and an interaction between PCSK9 and time were added to the model.Besides crude analyses, all analyses were also adjusted for sex, age, BMI, DAS28-CRP, ACPA and RF at baseline. Normality of the residuals of all analyses was evaluated by visual inspection.The statistical analysis was done using Stata (V.18) and SPSS (V.28). GraphPad Prism (V.10) and BioRender were used to create the figures.The NORD-STAR trial is registered with EudraCT (2011-004720-35) and ClinicalTrials.gov (NCT01491815). Supplementary material10.1136/rmdopen-2024-005129online supplemental file 1