IntroductionLupus nephritis (LN) leads to end stage renal disease (ESRD), and early diagnosis and disease monitoring of LN could significantly reduce the risk. however, there is not such a system clinically. In this study we aim to develop a biomarker-panel based point-of-care system for LN. IntroductionSystemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a multifactorial autoimmune disease with high comorbidity and multiorgan damage (1). Lupus nephritis (LN), one of the most severe organ manifestations of SLE, affects 30%–60% of adults and up to 70% of children with SLE disease (2). Fifteen years after the first diagnosis, 10%–30% of LN patients will deteriorate into end-stage renal disease (ESRD), requiring regular hemodialysis or kidney transplantation (3). Hence, LN flare represents a significant risk for SLE patients and may cause a tremendous socioeconomic burden. For effective clinical management of LN flare, diagnosis, disease monitoring, and LN flare assessment are critical. The gold standard for the clinical diagnosis of LN is a renal biopsy (4); however, it is invasive and may cause further kidney damage (5). Hence, it is particularly unfeasible to perform multiple renal biopsies to monitor disease progression or drug responses for LN (6). Compared to the traditional renal biopsy approach, the detection of LN-specific biomarkers in body fluids could be minimally invasive or noninvasive for early diagnosis and disease monitoring of LN (7). It is especially attractive and useful when serial detection or real-time monitoring of LN is needed (8). Importantly, the detection of urine or serum-based biomarkers for LN has great potential to inform the disease activity of LN using simple but rapid tests (1, 9). Currently, the need for biomarker-based tests is underscored by the inadequacy of conventional clinical measures to detect ongoing disease activity in lupus kidneys and early recurrence of nephritis (10). Given the heterogeneity of LN, it is particularly difficult to accurately diagnose or monitor LN or predict LN flare using a single biomarker. The up-and-coming Omics technologies, bioinformatics, and machine learning techniques may be promising in identifying a disease-specific biomarker panel to improve the sensitivity and specificity for early diagnosis and disease monitoring of LN (11–14).Current clinical biomarker tests, such as polymerase chain reaction (PCR), biosensor, chemical reaction-based assays, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), and lateral flow immunoassay (LFA), are mostly designed for the detection of individual biomarkers, such as DNA/RNA, blood glucose, electrolytes, enzymes, hormones, lipids, other metabolites, and proteins (15). These assays are either qualitative or quantitative and have been instrumental in detecting individual biomarkers. However, these platforms cannot simultaneously detect multiple biomarkers as a biomarker panel due to the technical difficulty of multiplexing.Currently, commercially available multiplex assays include bead-based arrays such as Luminex® xMAP® (Luminex Corporation, Austin, TX) and planar microarrays such as Kiloplex array (Raybiotech, Inc, Peachtree Corners, GA). The bead-based arrays immobilize capture molecules on the surface of the bead to achieve multiplexing, whereas the planar microarray uses the arrayed capture molecules for the detection of multiple targets on a chip (16). However, these technologies not only need specialized large laboratory equipment to run the experiments and detect the signals but also need sophisticated commercial software for data analysis.In this study, we aimed to (1) identify a biomarker panel that can reflect the disease activity of LN with superior sensitivity and specificity; (2) to develop a low-cost, quantitative, portable, and multiplexed biomarker panel miniarray (BPMA) system, which requires a smaller reaction volume, shorter incubation time, and an easy-to-use 3D-printed chip cassette for sample loading and washing, a low-cost microscopic array reader for smartphone imaging and a user-friendly open-source smartphone app for data analysis and reporting. More importantly, this may represent the first detection system for quantifying autoantibody (anti-dsDNA), protein biomarkers, and immune complexes on one chip. All these features could be beneficial for future diagnosis and disease monitoring of LN in homecare or community medicine.