METHODSA post‐hoc analysis of the DIAN‐TU‐001 trial (NCT01760005) examined 142 participants at risk for dominantly inherited AD randomized to solanezumab (n = 50), gantenerumab (n = 52), or placebo (n = 40). High‐resolution mass spectrometry quantified CSF tau species over four years. 2METHODS2.1Study participantsEligibility criteria for the DIAN‐TU‐001 included participants at‐risk for or known to have a DIAD mutation, who were between 15 years before to 10 years after the expected age of symptom onset, 20 and had a global Clinical Dementia Rating® (CDR®) of 0 (cognitively normal), 0.5 (very mild dementia), or 1 (mild dementia). 21 DIAD mutation carriers were randomized 3:1 to active drug (gantenerumab or solanezumab) or placebo with a minimization procedure. 22 Study personnel, sponsors, and participants were blinded to treatment assignment. The DIAN Observational study (DIAN‐OBS) participants included individuals of age 18 or older who were at‐risk for or known to have a DIAD mutation and who had provided CSF. The DIAN‐OBS and DIAN‐TU studies have similar protocols, including cognitive, clinical, imaging and biomarker measures and both studies excluded participants with the APP E693Q (Dutch) mutation. Full details for the DIAN‐TU‐001 and DIAN‐OBS are available in previous publications. 15 , 23 , 24 The studies were conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki (version 7) and the International Conference on Harmonization and Good Clinical Practice guidelines and had ethics committee approval at each participating site. Participants provided written informed consent.RESEARCH IN CONTEXT Systematic review: The measurement of multiple tau‐related biomarkers in observational cohorts of at‐risk or symptomatic Alzheimer disease has suggested that soluble tau changes in the cerebrospinal fluid may reflect both Aβ‐plaque and NFT tangle pathology. However, no studies have comprehensively assessed the effect of Aβ plaque reduction on ‘early’ (e.g. p‐tau217) and ‘late’ (e.g. MTBR‐tau243 and tau PET) tau biomarkers. Interpretation: Aβ‐plaque, but not soluble Aβ, reduction was associated with a distinct reduction of multiple ‘early’ tau biomarkers without a change in ‘late’ tau biomarkers. These findings support recent diagnostic criteria for Alzheimer's disease classifying early and later changes in tau‐related biomarkers and suggests the use of specific phospho‐tau biomarkers to monitor the response to Aβ‐plaque lowering therapies. Future directions: A comparative analyses of recently approved Aβ immunotherapies on tau‐related biomarkers is needed to better understand if these soluble measures can be used to monitor long‐term treatment effects. 2.2Study designDIAN‐TU‐001 was conducted at 25 sites in 7 countries from December 2012 through November 2019. The trial registration number is NCT01760005. Investigators are listed on the DIAN‐TU webpage https://dian.wustl.edu/for‐investigators/diantu‐investigator‐resources/dian‐tu‐study‐team/. Biomarkers were assessed at baseline and in years 1, 2, and 4. Target drug doses were increased approximately halfway through the study as previously detailed. 15 Gantenerumab was increased from 225 mg (subcutaneously, every 4 weeks) to 1200 mg in 2016. Solanezumab was increased from 400 mg (intravenously, every 4 weeks) to 1600 mg in 2017. The current CSF study includes only those participants who had CSF and brain imaging measured at all time points; the biomarker assessment between years 2 and 4 represents the time during which the drug doses were increased. This is an exploratory, post‐hoc analysis that was not part of the original clinical trial statistical analysis plan. Therefore, some analyses are underpowered, and the results should be interpreted as descriptive in nature.For the DIAN‐OBS participants (n = 247), the study was conducted at 22 sites and data underwent yearly quality‐control assessments for irregular results and missing data from January 26, 2009 to June 30, 2017.2.2.1Cerebrospinal Fluid AnalysesFor both DIAN‐TU‐001 and DIAN‐OBS, CSF was collected via standard lumbar puncture procedures using an atraumatic Sprotte spinal needle (22 Ga), typically in the morning and in fasting state. DIAN‐OBS CSF samples were centrifuged immediately upon collection and flash frozen, whereas DIAN‐TU‐001 samples were flash frozen immediately upon collection and shipped to the DIAN Biomarker Core. For the CSF tau‐related analyses, each sample underwent two freeze‐thaw cycles. Full details of the CSF preparation and LC‐MS/MS processing have been previously outlined in detail 5 , 6 and were consistent for both DIAN‐OBS and DIAN‐TU‐001. Importantly, except for non‐phosphorylated (total tau) and the microtubule binding region 243 (MTBR‐tau243) concentrations, all phospho‐tau measures represent the phosphorylated to unphosphorylated (pT## / T##) ratios for each modified residue or expressed as percentage (%phospho‐tau).2.2.2Tau and Amyloid PET ImagingFull details on the imaging protocols for 11C‐Pittsburgh Compound B (PiB) PET and 18F‐AV‐1451 (flortaucipir) PET have been provided previously. 25 , 26 Region of interest PET data were converted to regional standard uptake value ratios (SUVRs) — 47‐60 minute window for PiB PET and 80‐100 for flortaucipir — using the cerebellar grey as a reference and were partial volume corrected using a regional spread function for each region, which when combined form a geometric transfer matrix. 27 , 28 Of note, the tau PET results are derived from DIAN‐TU study data only, due to limited longitudinal tau PET in the DIAN observational cohort.2.3Study outcomesThe primary outcome of the DIAN‐TU‐001 study was the DIAN multivariate cognitive endpoint 1 . For this exploratory study, the primary outcomes were the differences in the soluble CSF tau‐related biomarkers in the treatment groups relative to the shared placebo group at the end of year 4. The two active treatment arms were compared to placebo but were not directly compared to each other.2.3.1Statistical Analyses2.3.1.1DIAN Observational DataFor each marker, the standardized mean value for mutation carriers (MCs) were estimated at each estimated years to symptom onset (EYO) point using linear mixed effects (LME) models using only baseline data, then plotted over EYO. These values were transformed into a value scaled from 0‐100 (see below) to better project the magnitude of change across the disease spectrum. The LME models included the fix effects of mutation status (MC vs. non‐carrier [NC]) and baseline EYO. All possible two‐way interaction terms along with second and third order of EYO terms were examined to reach a final model that fit the data well for each marker. A random effect was also included to account for the family affiliation.To evaluate the biomarker abnormality rate across EYO, percentage of abnormality for each biomarker was calculated by every five‐year EYO bin (i.e. ‐15 to ‐11, etc.). The 95th percentile of the NC group was set as abnormality cutoff for all measurements except for CSF Aβ42/40 where 5th percentile (lower ratio is more advanced disease) was used as the cutoff for abnormality.2.3.1.2DIAN‐TU DataFor the trial data, which had protocol specific biomarker collection intervals, a mixed model for repeated measures (MMRM) was employed to estimate the change from baseline within each group and to compare differences between these changes. The MMRM analysis incorporated the treatment group (including either treatment group and the shared placebo group), baseline values, post‐baseline visit times as categorical values, and the interaction between visit times and treatment as fixed effects; and employed an unstructured covariance matrix. We have recently developed a method to standardize different biomarkers to a scale of 0‐100, called CentiMarker 29 (similar to the Centiloid scale, 30 using the 95th percentile of the greatest abnormal values for all MCs and the mean from the NCs. This method provides a way of quantifying the change for each biomarker in a similar scale to better interpret the magnitude of drug effects on each biomarker. To evaluate the correlation between amyloid PiB‐PET or tau PET and each soluble biomarker, Spearman correlations were computed based on the individual annual rate of change estimated using the least squares method. This method was chosen due to the relatively small sample size of the trial as opposed to a bivariate mixed model which could be more subject to model convergence issues.To visualize the drug effect of gantenerumab on the normal disease progression pattern of the soluble tau biomarkers and amyloid and neurodegeneration, LOESS curves were generated over cognition‐adjusted EYO for gantenerumab‐treated MCs, a combined MC group of placebo and solanezumab and NCs. To more intuitively compare disease progression patterns across different biomarkers, each was standardized to a scale of 0‐100, called CentiMarker 29 using the 95th percentile of the greatest abnormal values for all MCs and the mean from the NCs. EYO was adjusted using the baseline values of International Shopping List Test‐Delayed Recall and Digit Symbol Substitution Test, employing a simplified disease progression model based on cross‐sectional data. 31 This adjusted EYO 31 can more accurately delineate the disease progression pattern compared to an unadjusted EYO (calculated using only mutation and familial information, 32 and is referred to as the cognition adjusted EYO. Because the adjustment utilized only baseline values, inclusion of two endpoints in the model was necessary for identifiability. Although any two endpoints can meet the model requirement, these ones were selected due to their greater sensitivity to disease severity and amyloid levels. 33 2.1Study participantsEligibility criteria for the DIAN‐TU‐001 included participants at‐risk for or known to have a DIAD mutation, who were between 15 years before to 10 years after the expected age of symptom onset, 20 and had a global Clinical Dementia Rating® (CDR®) of 0 (cognitively normal), 0.5 (very mild dementia), or 1 (mild dementia). 21 DIAD mutation carriers were randomized 3:1 to active drug (gantenerumab or solanezumab) or placebo with a minimization procedure. 22 Study personnel, sponsors, and participants were blinded to treatment assignment. The DIAN Observational study (DIAN‐OBS) participants included individuals of age 18 or older who were at‐risk for or known to have a DIAD mutation and who had provided CSF. The DIAN‐OBS and DIAN‐TU studies have similar protocols, including cognitive, clinical, imaging and biomarker measures and both studies excluded participants with the APP E693Q (Dutch) mutation. Full details for the DIAN‐TU‐001 and DIAN‐OBS are available in previous publications. 15 , 23 , 24 The studies were conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki (version 7) and the International Conference on Harmonization and Good Clinical Practice guidelines and had ethics committee approval at each participating site. Participants provided written informed consent.RESEARCH IN CONTEXT Systematic review: The measurement of multiple tau‐related biomarkers in observational cohorts of at‐risk or symptomatic Alzheimer disease has suggested that soluble tau changes in the cerebrospinal fluid may reflect both Aβ‐plaque and NFT tangle pathology. However, no studies have comprehensively assessed the effect of Aβ plaque reduction on ‘early’ (e.g. p‐tau217) and ‘late’ (e.g. MTBR‐tau243 and tau PET) tau biomarkers. Interpretation: Aβ‐plaque, but not soluble Aβ, reduction was associated with a distinct reduction of multiple ‘early’ tau biomarkers without a change in ‘late’ tau biomarkers. These findings support recent diagnostic criteria for Alzheimer's disease classifying early and later changes in tau‐related biomarkers and suggests the use of specific phospho‐tau biomarkers to monitor the response to Aβ‐plaque lowering therapies. Future directions: A comparative analyses of recently approved Aβ immunotherapies on tau‐related biomarkers is needed to better understand if these soluble measures can be used to monitor long‐term treatment effects. 2.2Study designDIAN‐TU‐001 was conducted at 25 sites in 7 countries from December 2012 through November 2019. The trial registration number is NCT01760005. Investigators are listed on the DIAN‐TU webpage https://dian.wustl.edu/for‐investigators/diantu‐investigator‐resources/dian‐tu‐study‐team/. Biomarkers were assessed at baseline and in years 1, 2, and 4. Target drug doses were increased approximately halfway through the study as previously detailed. 15 Gantenerumab was increased from 225 mg (subcutaneously, every 4 weeks) to 1200 mg in 2016. Solanezumab was increased from 400 mg (intravenously, every 4 weeks) to 1600 mg in 2017. The current CSF study includes only those participants who had CSF and brain imaging measured at all time points; the biomarker assessment between years 2 and 4 represents the time during which the drug doses were increased. This is an exploratory, post‐hoc analysis that was not part of the original clinical trial statistical analysis plan. Therefore, some analyses are underpowered, and the results should be interpreted as descriptive in nature.For the DIAN‐OBS participants (n = 247), the study was conducted at 22 sites and data underwent yearly quality‐control assessments for irregular results and missing data from January 26, 2009 to June 30, 2017.2.2.1Cerebrospinal Fluid AnalysesFor both DIAN‐TU‐001 and DIAN‐OBS, CSF was collected via standard lumbar puncture procedures using an atraumatic Sprotte spinal needle (22 Ga), typically in the morning and in fasting state. DIAN‐OBS CSF samples were centrifuged immediately upon collection and flash frozen, whereas DIAN‐TU‐001 samples were flash frozen immediately upon collection and shipped to the DIAN Biomarker Core. For the CSF tau‐related analyses, each sample underwent two freeze‐thaw cycles. Full details of the CSF preparation and LC‐MS/MS processing have been previously outlined in detail 5 , 6 and were consistent for both DIAN‐OBS and DIAN‐TU‐001. Importantly, except for non‐phosphorylated (total tau) and the microtubule binding region 243 (MTBR‐tau243) concentrations, all phospho‐tau measures represent the phosphorylated to unphosphorylated (pT## / T##) ratios for each modified residue or expressed as percentage (%phospho‐tau).2.2.2Tau and Amyloid PET ImagingFull details on the imaging protocols for 11C‐Pittsburgh Compound B (PiB) PET and 18F‐AV‐1451 (flortaucipir) PET have been provided previously. 25 , 26 Region of interest PET data were converted to regional standard uptake value ratios (SUVRs) — 47‐60 minute window for PiB PET and 80‐100 for flortaucipir — using the cerebellar grey as a reference and were partial volume corrected using a regional spread function for each region, which when combined form a geometric transfer matrix. 27 , 28 Of note, the tau PET results are derived from DIAN‐TU study data only, due to limited longitudinal tau PET in the DIAN observational cohort.