DiscussionIgG4 Caspr1 AN presents with a similar clinical phenotype to other nodopathies (e.g., neurofascin 155 and contactin 1), but with an older age at onset. Changes in antibody titers may be a potential biomarker for monitoring disease activity. DiscussionIn this study, we elucidated the comprehensive clinical, laboratory, electrophysiologic, and pathologic characteristics of IgG4 Caspr1 AN. The main findings are as follows: First, IgG4 Caspr1 AN was characterized by an older age at disease onset; distal-dominant limb weakness; gait disturbance with sensory ataxia and tremor; highly elevated CSF protein levels; and a poor response to IVIg, consistent with ANs targeting NF155 or CNTN1.5-12 Second, NCSs demonstrated severe conduction delays including prolonged F-wave and distal motor latencies and reduced sensorimotor conduction velocities. All patients with Caspr1 AN fulfilled the revised motor and sensory nerve conduction criteria in the EAN/PNS guidelines.4 Third, axo-glial detachment and an absence of macrophage-mediated demyelination were the pathologic features of sural nerves. Finally, serum NfL levels correlated with INCAT disability scores across patients, and antibody titers and serum NfL levels were associated with clinical severity in individual cases.Caspr1 AN is considered extremely rare. In Europe, the frequency of anti-Caspr1 IgG has been reported as between 0.2% (2/1,500, CBA) and 2.9% (1/35, CBA) in CIDP subgroups.14-17 This wide distribution may be caused by several factors including differences in inclusion criteria, races, and autoantibody identification methods. In this study, the positivity rate was 2.7% (19/716), suggesting that Caspr1 AN has a similar incidence to CNTN1 AN in Japan. It is important to exhaustively examine paranodal autoantibodies, including anti-Caspr1 IgG, irrespective of populations.To date, the clinical profile of Caspr1 AN differs over reports, likely because of relatively small case series. Although some patients reportedly have cranial nerve involvement and severe neuropathic pain,14,15 these symptoms were not confirmed as specific in our cohort. Our study provides further evidence that IgG4 anti-Caspr1 IgG presents with a conventional phenotype of ANs. One of the major clinical symptoms, sensory ataxia, may be caused by antibody binding to dorsal root ganglia neurons.19 Among 20 reported cases with IgG4 anti-Caspr1 or anti-Caspr1/CNTN1 complex IgG, the median age at onset was 51.0 (IQR 46.3–57.0) years.14,15,17,19,22,24,25 This older age at disease onset differs from that of NF155 AN, which exhibits a younger age at disease onset.6,7,11,12,22 Autoantibodies against CNTN1, which form a cis-complex with Caspr1 on the axolemma, also frequently affect older adults10-12; however, CNTN1 AN has a unique comorbidity with membranous nephropathy because CNTN1 is expressed on glomeruli.27,30 Our study elucidated the electrophysiologic features of IgG4 Caspr1 AN, highlighting marked proximal and distal conduction delays. Reviewing the literature, all 17 reported cases with detailed NCS findings have shown signs of demyelination fulfilling the EFNS/PNS electrodiagnostic criteria for definite CIDP with varying degrees of secondary axonal degeneration, identified as decreased amplitudes on NCSs or spontaneous activities suggesting acute denervation on EMG.14,15,17,19,24Regarding treatment, IgG4 Caspr1 AN was refractory to IVIg and required intensive immunotherapy. This poor response to IVIg may be because IgG4 cannot bind to Fc receptors or activate complement.31 However, some patients with predominantly IgG4 subclass showed a partial response to IVIg, which may be because coexisting IgG1–3 autoantibodies might affect the response to IVIg through complement activation.32 A good response to rituximab was reported in several case series.14,19,24 In Japan, rituximab is not covered by medical insurance systems, resulting in its limited use in our cohort. A notable finding in our study was that some patients achieved remission with corticosteroids, suggesting that corticosteroids may be a good therapeutic option—particularly in situations in which rituximab is not approved.Pathologic studies of peripheral nerves are lacking; light microscopy findings have been previously reported in just 7 cases with anti-Caspr1 and anti-Caspr1/CNTN1 complex IgG, with sub-perineurial edema, loss of myelinated fibers, rare inflammatory cells, and no onion bulbs.14,19,21,25 Axonal degeneration was observed in 4 of these 7 cases. Our study replicated the axonal degeneration findings with electrophysiologic changes of demyelination and no signs of macrophage-mediated demyelination. Furthermore, the ultrastructural analysis of paranodes in longitudinal sections under electron microscopy has been reported in only 2 previous cases—one with IgG4 and another with unidentified IgG subclass—showing axo-glial detachment.21,25 In our study, axo-glial detachment was more severe in the case with IgG4 compared with the case with non-IgG4. This finding suggests that the pathogenicity of IgG4 autoantibodies may occur through blocking protein-protein interactions. Similarly, transverse bands between paranodal loops and the axolemma are absent in Caspr1-knockout mice, which alters saltatory conduction through the inappropriate distribution of ion channels and paranodal proteins.33The pathogenicity of IgG4 anti-Caspr1 IgG has been suggested from only 1 study in which purified IgG4 from 1 patient disrupted the aggregation between CNTN1/Caspr1-expressing and NF155-expressing cell lines and penetrated the paranodes of murine sciatic nerve fibers after intraneural injections.17 In our study, serum IgG from most cases with IgG4 anti-Caspr1 IgG targeted nonreduced Caspr1 protein in Western blot analysis, although 4 cases also showed weak reactivity against reduced Caspr1 protein. This finding implies that the autoantibodies might recognize various epitopes, and that most of these polyclonal antibodies mainly target conformational epitopes. Conversely, non-IgG4 anti-Caspr1 IgG may target linear epitopes because the 2 conditions have the same reactivity. Alternatively, reactivity might be associated with comorbid autoimmune diseases that produce various autoantibodies, such as Sjögren syndrome. The pathogenicity of non-IgG4 anti-Caspr1 IgG remains unknown. An IgG subclass switch from non-IgG4 to IgG4 is reportedly observed in the chronic phase of AN.18 In our cases, we were unable to evaluate switching status because of the negative conversion of anti-Caspr1 IgG in follow-up serum samples. Two patients with non-IgG4 Caspr1 AN in our cohort were middle-aged women who shared an acute-onset neuropathy presenting with cranial nerve involvement, consistent with previous literature.18 Thus, clinical phenotypes may differ between IgG4 and non-IgG4 subclasses, although larger studies are required. Further studies are also needed for epitope identification and its relationship with phenotype.Our study has several limitations. First, CBA—a recommended screening test for paranodal autoantibodies in the EAN/PNS guidelines—was not performed.4 However, ELISA is reportedly more sensitive than CBA for detecting anti-Caspr1 IgG.19,26 Our in-house ELISA had high specificity, and positive samples were confirmed at multiple dilutions. Moreover, our results were confirmed by immunohistochemistry or Western blot to eliminate false positives and improve specificity. However, multiple assays might have a minimal effect on accuracy26; therefore, antibody testing by international reference laboratories would provide further validation of our assay. Second, the clinical profile of CIDP in the antibody-testing patient cohort differed slightly from that of CIDP in the general Japanese population in the latest nationwide survey, with relatively larger proportions of distal type and elevated CSF protein levels.34 However, patient data may not reflect the characteristics of Caspr1 AN across Japan. The positivity rate (16/78, 21%) for NF155 AN at Kyushu University Hospital was higher than in previous reports5,11,12 because patients with suspected ANs were referred to Kyushu University Hospital with experts in this field for further investigation and treatment. Third, NCS procedures and MRI sequences were not standardized across hospitals. In addition, spinal nerve root hypertrophy on magnetic resonance neurography was assessed qualitatively because of a lack of consensus about cutoff values.4 Finally, this was a retrospective study; we acquired data using a questionnaire and medical records, and patients received different immunotherapies at different time points. We were, therefore, unable to provide clear evidence regarding the efficacy of individual immunotherapies. Moreover, differences in clinical and electrophysiologic severity, treatment response, and long-term prognosis between each AN are beyond the scope of this study.Nevertheless, this large cohort study provides valuable data about the clinical, electrophysiologic, and pathologic features of Caspr1 AN. IgG4 Caspr1 AN presents with a conventional phenotype of ANs, with an older age at disease onset. Diagnostic workups of paranodal autoantibodies should include anti-Caspr1 IgG and IgG subclasses, which can guide optimal treatments. Antibody titers and serum NfL levels may be useful biomarkers for monitoring disease activity and treatment response.