1INTRODUCTIONBreast Cancer (BC) is the most common malignancy and the leading cause of cancer deaths in women worldwide. CTCs can be detected in the bloodstream of 20%–30% of locally advanced BC patients as compared to >60% of patients with distant metastases. 1 CTCs are shed from primary tumors, travel through the circulatory system, and disseminate to distant organs where they initiate the formation of metastases. In addition to CTCs, circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) can be detected in the blood, consisting of small DNA fragments released into the bloodstream by tumor cells from various sources, including the primary tumor, metastases, and CTCs. 2 Such CTCs and ctDNA have inspired the diagnostic concept of liquid biopsies, as they offer a way to track the state of metastatic seeds in real‐time. 3 CTC counts have shown established value in prognosis and the prediction of treatment response, while CTC‐based predictions of therapeutic targets await final evidence for their clinical utility. 4 Due to their rarity, the detection of CTCs is challenging and has been based on their biophysical or biological properties. The Food and Drug Administration has cleared the CellSearch® system for prognostic use in monitoring BC patients after initial therapy, which relies on positive selection of CTCs with EpCAM expression, which leads to a sub‐type bias and offers only one open fluorescence channel for biomarker detection. 5 Genotoxic therapies (GTs) are still the predominating treatment type for mBC patients, especially of triple‐negative subtypes. 6 Here, capturing multifactorial DNA damage responses (DDRs), DNA repair, and linked tumor cell phenotypes of relevance show promise, since altogether these features play a vital role in the plasticity of CTCs, their transition between epithelial and mesenchymal states, and the development of resistance mechanisms. 7 Therefore, a technology that can identify and offer insight into the complex make‐up of CTC phenotypes is needed. CyTOF® can detect >40 antibodies simultaneously and is therefore potentially highly suited for providing information about disease signatures and therapy responses. 8 Around one‐third of BCs exhibit defective HR, the most error‐free pathway of DNA double‐strand break (DSB) repair. 9 DSBs arise during persistent replication stress, such as during GT with platinum‐based or poly(ADP‐ribose)polymerase (PARP)‐inhibitory drugs. Patients with HRD or germline BRCA1/2 mutation status are likely sensitive to such treatments, which is why the determination of the HR status in mBC is important for treatment decisions. 10 , 11 Various HRD assays have been developed based either on genomic or functional characteristics. Genomic tests identify HRD‐specific mutational signatures or rearrangements like Large‐scale State Transitions (LSTs) by genome‐wide microarrays or whole exome/genome sequencing (WGS), that is, focusing on genomic scars that accumulate over time. 12 , 13 Functional assays have looked at the HR status in real‐time by measuring RAD51 foci formation in primary BC tissue or malignant pleural effusion (PE) after damage induction, which is measured by γH2AX foci formation through immunofluorescence microscopy (IF). 14 , 15 In this study, we (i) demonstrate unbiased detection of CTCs from longitudinally monitored mBC patients by use of CyTOF®, (ii) compare these results with CellSearch®‐ and shallow WGS‐based quantification of the TF, (iii) analyze CTC‐specific phenotypes, via RAD51 and γH2AX signals, in particular, and (iv) compare the resulting functional HRD status with ctDNA‐based, genomic HRD, and survival.