BackgroundAlzheimer’s disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative disease characterized by Aβ plaques and neurofibrillary tangles. Chronic inflammation and synaptic dysfunction lead to disease progression and cognitive decline. Small extracellular vesicles (sEVs) are implicated in AD progression by facilitating the spread of pathological proteins and inflammatory cytokines. This study investigates synaptic dysfunction and neuroinflammation protein markers in plasma-derived sEVs (PsEVs), their association with Amyloid-β and tau pathologies, and their correlation with AD progression. BackgroundThe progressive neurodegenerative condition known as Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is characterized by cognitive decline as a result of the formation of amyloid-β (Aβ) plaques, neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs), and chronic neuroinflammation that leads to neurodegeneration [1–3]. Synapse loss is a crucial pathophysiological event in disease progression, and synaptic proteins have been extensively studied due to earlier perturbations . The pathological hallmark of AD, amyloid-β plaques, originates from the imprecise cleavage of the amyloid precursor protein (APP) by β-secretase (BACE1) and γ-secretase generating amyloid-β peptide forms [6–9]. Primary amyloid-β peptide forms are Aβ40 and Aβ42, where the majority of the amyloid-β plaques in AD brains are composed of Aβ42 . Many point mutations in APP and γ-secretase cause familial early-onset AD, favoring Aβ42 formation, causing amyloid-β peptides prone to aggregate as fibrils and plaques [9, 11–14]. Hyperphosphorylation of tau causes the formation of NFTs. The combined effect of accumulation of NFTs, amyloid-β fibrils, and plaques leads to neuronal function loss and cell death . Aβ plaques activate immune receptors on microglia, thereby releasing pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines that mediate neuroinflammation, which, if it reaches a chronic level, causes damage to brain cells, including axonal demyelination and synaptic pruning [17–23]. In addition to these, other proteins, including the neurofilament light (NFL) protein, glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), and synaptic proteins, have also been identified as AD biomarkers [24–28]. Understanding the intricate dynamics of AD in terms of its varied pathophysiological manifestations, such as neuroinflammation, synaptic loss, and proteinopathy, is essential for developing potential therapeutic interventions for AD and biomarker discovery. In clinical practice, cognitive assessment tools such as the Addenbrooke’s Cognitive Examination (ACE-III) and Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) are used to diagnose AD. These tools evaluate verbal fluency and temporal orientation, although results may be influenced by subject bias [29–31].In recent years, small extracellular vesicles (sEVs) or exosomes have been acknowledged as crucial mediators of communication and signaling within the body, contributing significantly to the transmission of cellular cargo in various health and disease states. They also play a notable role in disseminating protein aggregates associated with neurodegenerative diseases . sEVs are bi-layered membrane vesicles that have a heterogeneous group of (< 200 nm in diameter) that are found in different human body fluids, including blood, urine, saliva, and ascites, and that are actively released by all cell types [33–35]. For their functions in various physiological and pathological circumstances, sEVs are the most extensively researched type of EV [36–38]. sEVs exchange information between cells by transferring bioactive components (nucleic acids and proteins) . As the sEVs’ composition bears the molecular signature of the secreting cell and bears an intrinsic property of transversing the blood–brain barrier (BBB) in both directions , they are a target of constant research in neurodegenerative disease. Furthermore, sEVs released by neuronal cells are crucial in transmitting signals to other nerve cells, influencing central nervous system (CNS) development, synaptic activity regulation, and nerve injury regeneration. Moreover, sEVs exhibit a dual function in neurodegenerative processes, as sEVs not only play an essential role in clearing misfolded proteins, thereby exerting detoxifying effects and providing neuroprotection . On the other hand, they also have the potential to participate in the propagation and aggregation of misfolded proteins, particularly implicated in the pathological spread of Tau aggregates as indicated by both in vitro and in vivo studies . As a protective mechanism, astrocytes (most abundant glial cells) accumulate at the locations where Aβ peptides are deposited, internalizing and breaking down aggregated peptides . However, severe endosomal–lysosomal abnormalities arise in astrocytes when a significantly large amount of Aβ accumulates within astrocytes for a prolonged period without degradation . Astrocytes then release engulfed amyloid-β (1-42) protofibrils through exosomes, leading to severe neurotoxicity to neighboring neurons . Additionally, it has been found that the release of amyloid-β by microglia in association with large extracellular vesicles (Aβ-lEVs) damages synaptic plasticity and modifies the architecture of the dendritic spine . Thus, sEVs can be a compelling subject for the investigation to understand AD’s inflammation and synaptic dysfunction [48–52].In this study, we reported that protein levels are associated with AD pathology, neuroinflammation, and synaptic dysfunction in plasma-derived small extracellular vesicles (PsEVs). Our objective was to understand the pathophysiological process, neuroinflammation, synaptic dysfunction, and Aβ pathology through sEVs. Our study revealed a significant correlation between the concentration of cargo proteins derived from PsEVs and clinical diagnosis concerning ACE-III and MMSE scores. Furthermore, the levels of these studied proteins within PsEVs could differentiate between patients with MCI and AD. Thus, our study sheds light on the potential of PsEVs in understanding AD dynamics and offers insights into the underlying mechanisms of disease progression.