IntroductionSystemic sclerosis (SSc) is a chronic, incurable connective tissue disease, associated with high morbidity and mortality. SSc is characterised by early microvasculopathy, inflammation, autoimmunity and increased extracellular matrix (ECM) deposition, leading to tissue remodelling and organ fibrosis.1 The spectrum of SSc spreads from very early SSc (veSSc, patients at risk of developing definite SSc) to advanced, life-threatening disease. Early diagnosis of patients with SSc is of utmost importance for an optimal management and prevention of morbidity.2 However, because the onset of SSc is often insidious and heterogeneous, the early stages of the disease are still insufficiently understood and difficult to diagnose.The presence of Raynaud’s phenomenon, puffy fingers, positive antinuclear antibodies (ANAs) and signs of microvasculopathy by capillaroscopy are acknowledged as ‘red flags’ for the presence of veSSc.3–5 In a recent analysis, we could show that among patients with veSSc, only a minority have an early disease with short disease duration while in others it appears to be a long-standing very mild form of the disease. No clinical parameters could be identified differentiating the two subgroups of veSSc.6 There is a high unmet need to better understand the pathogenic processes underlying the veSSc phenotype. The current paradigm is that vascular injury and endothelial cell activation, together with an activation of the immune system, are the initiating events in the pathogenesis of SSc. This paradigm is supported by clinical observations: Raynaud syndrome, typical capillaroscopy changes and autoantibodies are hallmarks of veSSc. In this concept, activation of fibroblasts and dysregulation of the ECM metabolism are later events induced by the inflammatory and microvascular changes. Indeed, clinically detectable fibrosis of the skin and internal organs is often absent in patients with veSSc. However, the development of tissue fibrosis is a longer process, and molecular activation of fibroblasts and disturbance of ECM synthesis and degradation might be ongoing for a long time before organ fibrosis becomes clinically detectable.7 8 One possibility to assess ECM turnover and activation is to measure ECM neoepitopes. Circulating ECM neoepitopes resulting from synthesis and degradation of collagens can be measured in serum and reflect the ECM turnover. Previously, we have shown that ECM neoepitopes are dysregulated in SSc and that turnover markers of type III and IV collagens are predictive of progression of fibrosis in patients with established SSc.9 In this study, we wanted to challenge the current paradigm of the pathogenesis of SSc with vascular and autoimmune changes occurring first, followed by ECM remodelling.8 We hypothesised that ECM remodelling while not yet clinically detectable, occurs in parallel with vascular and autoimmune changes. To address this hypothesis, we measured circulating neoepitopes in patients with veSSc, which show vascular manifestations and/or autoimmune features, but do not yet have skin and organ fibrosis present.Patients and methodsWe included patients with veSSc, defined as the presence of Raynaud’s phenomenon and at least one other possible manifestation of SSc (puffy fingers, positive ANAs, pathological capillaroscopy), but who did not meet the 2013 American College of Rheumatology/European Alliance of Associations for Rheumatology (ACR/EULAR) classification criteria for SSc10 and did not have any clinical evidence for skin fibrosis (modified Rodnan skin score of 0/51 points) and interstitial lung disease (ILD, by high-resolution CT of the chest). Patients with a baseline visit to our centre from 2011 to 2014 and serum samples at baseline were included. Medical data and biobanking samples were collected and processed by European Scleroderma Trials and Research standards.11 12 Healthy control (HC) volunteers from Zurich were included. This HC cohort has been described and results for ECM epitopes have been shown in a prior paper from our group.9 Candidate biomarkers (ECM neoepitopes) were selected by expert opinion (OD, RD, SJ, BM, MAK, A-CB-J, ASS and PJ) considering the most relevant collagens in fibrosis. These markers, generated by cleavage of procollagens or mature collagens in processes of formation or degradation, were measured by validated ELISA-assays in serum.13–16 Measurements were performed in duplicate and were blinded. The formation markers were: PRO-C3 (the N-terminal propeptide of type III collagen), PRO-C4 (the N-terminal propeptide of type IV collagen) and PRO-C5 (the C-terminal propeptide of type V collagen). The degradation markers were C3M (peptide of type III collagen from degradation by matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-9), C4M (peptide of type IV collagen from degradation by MMP-2, MMP-9 and MMP-12), C6M (peptide of type VI collagen from degradation by MMP-2 and MMP-9) and BGM (peptide of biglycan from degradation by MMP-2 and MMP-12).In addition to the individual collagen neoepitopes, the ratios between the formation and degradation markers of collagens type III and IV were analysed as surrogate biomarkers of collagen turnover.Statistical analysisNormally distributed data are shown as mean±SD, non-normally distributed data as median and IQR. The biomarker graphics display the SE of the mean (SEM). Differences between groups were compared by the Mann-Whitney U test and correlations by Spearman’s test. Categorical variables were compared by χ2 or Fisher’s exact test. Bonferroni correction for multiple tests was applied. Biomarkers were investigated for sensitivity and specificity by Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve. A predictive analysis using Cox logistic regression was also performed. Missing data were reported as observed. The analyses and graphical illustration were performed using IBM SPSS Statistics V.29.0 and GraphPad Prism V.8.