DiscussionImproving malaria surveillance in an area where the malaria infection or disease is prevalent using a simple, highly sensitive and accurate tool is essential. A complementary indicator that allow to assess the level of human exposure to An. gambiae bites in the context of reducing malaria by at least 90% by 2030 as targeted by the WHO is very important to validate worldwide40. The present study focused on the application of the Anopheles gSG6-P1 salivary biomarker to assess vector bite exposure and mosquito density in a rural area and according to transmission season (dry and rainy seasons).Data from the study conducted in the village of Bankeng, Cameroon, in the Central African Region, have showed that An. gambiae s.l. represented 99% of the Anopheles mosquito’s collected during the entomological survey in both the dry and rainy seasons. A similar distribution was reported in a recent study in the same area, indicating that the population of the village is highly exposed to An. gambiae39.The level of IgG response to the gSG6-P1 salivary peptide correlated significantly with mosquito density. In fact, the level of IgG response, as well as the aggressiveness Anopheles, was higher in the rainy than in the dry season. This is in line with numerous previous studies that have reported this specific immune response as a relevant tool to assess mosquito density according to the areas in the West African region and in Asia23,24,31,49. These data demonstrated the relevance of using this biomarker to distinguish seasonal variations in human exposure to Anopheles bites and mosquito density.Infected mosquitoes were found only during the rainy season. The sporozoite IRs were higher (10.63%) than what is generally reported as 5% of field mosquitoes being infected50,51, collected by HLC, and consequently the EIR was 1.42 ib/p/n with infected mosquitoes found in the rainy season. No infected mosquitoes were found in the dry season, probably due to the low density of mosquitoes collected, which may indicate the potential limitations of entomological methods in the dry season. Our data suggest that people in Bankeng are at high risk of being bitten by infected mosquitoes during the rainy season, and therefore at high risk of malaria transmission during the same period.Malaria transmission is generally thought to be higher during the rainy season, when environmental conditions are favorable for the development of Anopheles larvae, than during the dry season, when mosquitoes do not breed. As expected, our results show that the prevalence of malaria infection was higher in the rainy season compared to the dry season. In the same line, entomological data clearly indicated a higher HBR with Anopheles infective bites in the rainy season, but not with infective bites in the dry season, even when individuals were also found infected with Plasmodium parasites.Indeed, parasitological data indicated that prevalence and Plasmodium densities were not similar between the rainy and dry seasons, which seems to confirm the immunological observations when comparing globally infected individuals in the rainy and dry seasons. The malaria infection status (infected and uninfected) reported in the rainy season and compared with that observed in the dry season reinforces the immunological observations, indicating that individuals, whether infected or not, were exposed to the same level of vector bites.The level of IgG anti-gSG6-P1 was higher in infected individuals compared to uninfected individuals in the rainy season with no significant difference, in contrast to the dry season where uninfected individuals appear to have a high level of Ab response. However, a significant difference between infected and uninfected individuals has been reported, with higher levels of IgG anti-gSG6-p1 in infected individuals29,30,32,33,35. On the contrary, we did not make the same observation and our results are comparable to those obtained by Traore et al. in Ivory Coast according to the rainy or the dry season26,27. This trend remains the same when we compared the level of the IgG Ab response between only the 31 individuals present during the two sampling periods (rainy and dry season). Although this sample size is small and may be biased, it remains that when there is high exposure to Anopheles bites, the level of response between infected and uninfected individuals may not be significantly different26. This observation suggests that IgG anti-gSG6-p1 is not a necessary a biomarker of infection for the higher level of Ab response of infected individuals in the rainy season, period of higher transmission, although it is a good biomarker of exposure to mosquito bites and vector densities according to season26,27 and to the study site26,35. Interestingly, infected individuals were found in the dry season, but no infected mosquitoes were found. These observations show the limitations of entomology, as the density of mosquitoes in the dry season is very low to detect infective bites and can lead to confusion. However, regardless of the aggressiveness of the mosquitoes (low HBR), individuals are still exposed to the bites of a few circulating Anopheles. It cannot be excluded that the observed prevalence of Plasmodium infection is a case of recrudescence of submicroscopic parasitemia, which increases over time and is detected during periods of low transmission.No association with the level of IgG response to the gSG6-P1 antigen according to the gender was observed in the population study. Indeed, the IgG response to gSG6-P1 peptide could not differentiate human exposure to Anopheles bites regardless of the gender. Making this biomarker a good tool that can be used in all the population independently of the sex as reported in our previous study35,36 and also in others studies in West and East Africa32,33. The level of the immune response did not vary with regard to age group and this was also observed in our previous study36, other study reported no association with this immune response and the age according to season27. However, some studies reported an association between age and the level of IgG to gSG6-P1 antigen27,30,48, the IgG response increasing with age as people gradually acquired the immunity against Anopheles mosquito saliva.The specific IgG response to the gSG6-P1 peptide has also been shown in several studies in Senegal, western Angola and Kenya to be a suitable immunological biomarker for assessing low levels of human exposure to Anopheles bites24,33,34,52, as it was the case in the dry season in the present study. We found an association between mosquito density and the level of immune response to the salivary peptide. This shows the importance of this biomarker even in the dry season when mosquito densities are low, because even though mosquito densities are low, people are being bitten. And even though it is lower than in the wet season, the biomarker still detects the immune response. All of these data tend to support the proposal that the IgG response to the salivary peptide appears to be an effective biomarker for detecting the reduction in exposure to Anopheles mosquito bites. In fact, this specific immune biomarker was able to detect the reduction in exposure to vector bites that may be due to vector control strategies implemented in the fight against malaria. In contrast to others studies24,53,54, we did not find any significant difference between the use of mosquito bed nets and the level of IgG response to the gSG6-P1 antigen. This observation was also made in our previous study conducted in rural area35,36. The raison behind can be a bias in the questionnaire, indeed the information was given on the use of bed nets by participants without a through observation, if people really ownership or use it. Also, the integrity of the LLINs was not checked during the survey. Moreover, Anopheles bite equally outdoor and indoor as observed with entomological data in this area. Finally the type of house, mainly built in still that allow mosquito to get in suggested that people are exposed to mosquito bite continually in our study site. These information’s are very important in the monitoring of human exposure to malaria vectors bites. Indeed, it has been shown that after the use of vector control measures such as insecticide-treated nets (ITNs), insecticide sprays, insect repellents and bed nets, the levels of IgG anti-gSG6-P1 decrease significantly25,53,54. All these data show that this IgGis very labile and decreases significantly when there is no exposure to Anopheles bite. The results confirm the ability of this marker to detect exposure in areas where mosquito density is very low (depending on the season). It could therefore be very useful in the current context where vector control strategies tend to reduce human exposure to Anopheles bites. Such a marker would therefore allow the effectiveness of these strategies to be monitored in areas where mosquito densities have decreased. ConclusionThis study highlights the usefulness of this biomarker (IgG anti-gSG6-P1) to detect individual exposure to Anopheles bites during periods of low mosquito exposure. The IgG anti-gSG6-P1 peptide discriminates season of exposure and mosquito density variation, showing that when entomological methods lack effectiveness, as observed in the dry season with very low Anopheles density and no infective transmission bite, the immune response to mosquito bites can be easily used to identify individuals exposed to the bites of malaria vector. These observations could be very important for decision making regardless of the vector control strategies implemented by the National Malaria Control Program in Cameroon and also in rural African contexts.