DiscussionAlthough immune checkpoint inhibition has become a mainstay of cancer treatment, deep and lasting responses are achieved only in a minority of individuals with metastatic cancer, and cures are mostly limited to very small subpopulations, if any, perhaps with the exception of individuals with cutaneous melanoma18.Most metastatic solid tumours in patients are refractory to current immunotherapy from the start of anti-PD-1 or anti-PD-L1 treatment. For most tumour types treated with CPI, 50–85% of patients fail to respond to initial anti-PD-1 or anti-PD-L1 monotherapy as per RECIST 1.1 criteria and in most tumour progression or relapse and death occurs19.So far, blocking inhibitory signals or adding activating stimuli on top of PD-1-based immune checkpoint blockade has still mostly failed to improve response rates or survival20–22. Thus, there is a clear need to better understand the reasons for primary immune checkpoint resistance in non-responding patients and for secondary refractoriness in initially responding patients.GDF-15 was originally discovered as a macrophage inhibitory cytokine (MIC-1)23 and found to be potentially important for feto-maternal tolerance, with high miscarriage rates in pregnancy if the GDF-15 level in serum does not reach the levels observed in healthy pregnancy7,8. Metabolically, GDF-15 was shown to induce anorexia and cachexia through the GFRAL receptor expressed by neurons in the brainstem24. In tumours, GDF-15 is often expressed by cancer cells already at diagnosis, and its expression is further induced following tumour treatment and progression25, making it the most prominently overexpressed cytokine in cancer26, but its role as a tumour-derived potent local immunosuppressant has only recently been recognized3.No cognate receptor has been discovered on leukocytes yet. However, GDF-15 has been shown to suppress tumour surveillance by macrophages27 and to inhibit inflammatory signalling in macrophages in the liver28. Tumoural GDF-15 expression prevents effector T cell adhesion and transmigration into the TME3. This mechanism was found to correlate with a disruption of LFA-1 β2-integrin-dependent actin engagement, which may affect not only diapedesis but also the immune synapse, which it is likely to destabilize29,30. In our investigations, high intratumoural and serum GDF-15 levels correlated with reduced levels of immune infiltration in the TME, reduced levels of T cell proliferation and reduced levels of granzyme B (GZMB) expression in both patients with cancer in last-line treatment and those newly diagnosed with cancer. This further supports the immunosuppressive role of GDF-15 in cancer.Preclinical research has shown that intratumoural expression of GDF-15 renders tumours unresponsive to PD-1 blockade3. In addition, GDF-15 expression in CPI-treatment-naive patients was correlated with lack of response to immunotherapy. In the present study, T cell infiltration, proliferation and activation, accompanied by induction of interferon-related genes and pathways in the TME, were observed after 14 days of anti-GDF-15 monotherapy (Figs. 1b,c and 4a,b), whereas expression of T cell exhaustion markers was not affected (Extended Data Fig. 3a). As blocking GDF-15 is not expected to substantially alter immunogenicity of the tumour or to overcome exhaustion of antitumoural T cells, combination therapy with CPIs is considered the best therapeutic option to achieve and sustain maximum antitumoural efficacy. Data from immune monitoring of interferon-γ-inducible chemokines during co-therapy in this study (Fig. 4c–e and Extended Data Fig. 4a–c) support this combination treatment concept. In addition, the median fold change in intratumoural T cell numbers under visugromab monotherapy further increased for proliferating T cells and remained stable for CD3+GZMB+ T cells following PD-1 blockade. This supports the hypothesis that neutralization of intratumoural GDF-15 enables T cells to infiltrate irrespective of their antigen specificity, but combination therapy with a CPI enhances survival and proliferation of stimulated T cells within the TME.The first-in-human trial of visugromab (CTL-002-001; NCT04725474) was conducted in individuals with anti-PD-1 or anti-PD-L1 relapsed or refractory tumours, most having exhausted all treatment options and received visugromab–nivolumab combination therapy as the fourth line (median) of treatment (range second–seventh line).Overall, the combination treatment was very well tolerated. However, an aspect to consider is that trial participants included could not have experienced serious side effects during previous exposure to CPI treatment as a minimum of 12 weeks continuous treatment had to have been tolerated (to exclude pseudoprogressors). Therefore, those patients prone to such side effects could have been filtered out, and this could, at least in part, explain the very benign adverse event profile. Of note, and in line with the known metabolic and nutritional effect of GDF-15 (ref. 31), the subpopulation of patients with high serum GDF-15 levels showed an increase in body weight following GDF-15 blockade.Remarkably, the treatment induced a substantial number of deep and long-lasting objective tumour regressions up to confirmed CRs in non-squamous NSCLC and UC. This provides evidence for long-term antitumoural activity and effective tumour mass removal by the immune system in a distinct subset of patients. At this early stage of visugromab exploration, the response rate and durability of responses in these mostly third- to fourth-line-treated patients compare already favourably with the standard of care in these indications (for example, docetaxel in second-line NSCLC has an ORR of 9–12% and a DOR of just 5–8 months).Notably, more than half of all responding patients in the NSCLC and UC cohorts of the trial experienced a response depth on study treatment as per RECIST 1.1 criteria that had not been reached on initial, prior anti-PD-1 or anti-PD-L1 treatment. In addition, 3 of the 4 patients with a CR for NSCLC, UC and HCC had not achieved a CR on any prior line of treatment, including their initial anti-PD-1 or anti-PD-L1 treatment.These results warrant further investigation of visugromab in combination with CPIs and other treatment modalities in randomized clinical trials, including trials recruiting patients at earlier lines of treatment and stages of their disease for which most immunotherapies do unfold their full potential.Two other anti-GDF-15 neutralizing monoclonal antibodies have entered clinical exploration in patients with cancer. Ponsegromab was well tolerated in a phase 1b study and demonstrated preliminary evidence for efficacy against cachexia by inducing weight gain in patients with cancer with elevated serum GDF-15 (ref. 32) and cachexia. AZD8853 has completed a first-in-human trial (NCT05397171) but achieved only transient GDF-15 neutralization and did not result in any objective clinical response when treating mainly patients with MSS colorectal cancer33.Rechallenge of patients with anti-PD-1 or anti-PD-L1 relapsed or refractory disease with nivolumab or pembrolizumab in monotherapy is rarely successful. In patients meeting the strict inclusion criteria for anti-PD-1 or anti-PD-L1 relapsed or refractory disease of our study, reported ORRs for monotherapy retreatment attempts are 0–5% (refs. 11–16). Likewise, a large retrospective analysis on treatment beyond progression (another form of retreatment in monotherapy for patients that progressed on anti-PD-1 treatment with pembrolizumab) revealed a response rate as per RECIST 1.1 of just 2.8% in a patient population not too different from that of our trial34. Addition of visugromab, however, restored anti-PD-1 activity to levels nearly reaching response rates reported in populations with checkpoint-naive NSCLC and UC (reported to be at 18–21% for anti-PD-1-naive NSCLC and UC in second-line treatment35,36). Therefore, it can be inferred that GDF-15 is a druggable roadblock for successful immune checkpoint inhibition in a distinct target population.Responses occurred in both PD-L1+ and PD-L1− tumours, with a tendency for enrichment of responses in patients positive for PD-L1 with pre-existing T cell infiltration. GDF-15 serum levels were not predictive for response, suggesting that even low GDF-15 levels can already be suppressive of antitumour immune responses (Extended Data Fig. 6a), and that serum levels of GDF-15 may not be a direct reflection of intratumoural levels, but influenced by tumour size and production rate per volume. At present, the datasets available are too small and do not allow one to assess whether serum GDF-15 can ultimately be used to enrich for responding patients. Weight gain, however, seemed to be higher in patients with elevated serum GDF-15 levels during visugromab treatment (pooled data from patients with NSCLC, UC and HCC; Extended Data Fig. 6b). Overall, it seems reasonable to assume that local GDF-15 levels in the TME suppress antitumour immune responses, whereas systemic GDF-15 serum levels determine weight loss due to anorexia.Taken together, the provided and published data3,27,28,37 suggest that GDF-15 may be a new resistance factor for cancer immunotherapy in a distinct subpopulation of patients and tumour types. GDF-15 seems to have a potentially significant role as a T cell repellent and T cell suppressant in the TME. This implies that GDF-15 inhibition can improve success rates of anti-PD-1-based cancer immunotherapy not only in late- to last-line treatment of non-squamous NSCLC and UC and possibly HCC, as shown here, but also in earlier stages of these diseases. Future clinical trials with anti-GDF-15 in early and advanced cancer are thus warranted, to further elucidate the role of GDF-15, discover potentially response-predictive biomarkers and fully elucidate the mechanisms of action and ultimate clinical potential of GDF-15 inhibition. Reporting summaryFurther information on research design is available in the Nature Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article.