4. ConclusionsIn this work, we have systematically studied the impact of receptor protein characteristics on immobilization strategies and evaluated the suitability of reactive copolymer-coated PET as a substrate for constructing flexible, microvolume ELISA platforms. Passive adsorption was effective for antibody immobilization, while the amino-reactive MCP-2 copolymer ensured stable and functional covalent attachment of protein antigens. DNA-directed immobilization (DDI) demonstrated high versatility. It enables the immobilization of a diverse range of receptors using the Copoly Azide copolymer, which facilitates DBCO-modified DNA attachment for subsequent protein conjugate binding. This strategy allowed the reliable immobilization of complex proteins, expanding the range of usable receptors on a platform. The copolymers also exhibited antifouling properties, minimizing non-specific binding and enhancing assay sensitivity. Designed serological platforms effectively distinguished between COVID-19-positive and -negative serum samples. Quantitative measurements and differentiation between antibody subclasses were also possible. Flexible PET foils increased platform versatility and enable further integration into complex systems, such as microfluidic devices for sophisticated miniaturized diagnostics. Combining DDI with flexible substrates broadens the scope of applications. It facilitates the development of compact, multifunctional platforms suitable for multiplex biosensing and point-of-care diagnostics. The impact of the current study could be broadened by further investigation of the platform’s potential for detecting a wider range of biomarkers, making it applicable to other infectious diseases. The usage of the DDI strategy for different antigens would result in the improvement of the platform’s versatility and adaptability, supporting high-throughput analytical applications. Further development could also focus on enhancing the integration of this platform into portable and field-deployable diagnostic tools, enabling rapid, on-site testing in diverse scenarios.