4DISCUSSIONThis study demonstrates the feasibility of CyTOF® as a multiparametric method for the identification and characterization of CTCs from mBC patients. Importantly, this methodology enables the analysis of single cells that we engage here to capture the HRD status of CTCs in real‐time, aiming at better prediction of treatment responses.The current gold‐standard for CTC identification is the CellSearch® technology, which uses ferrofluidic EpCAM selection, but has only one free fluorescence channel for biomarker analysis. CyTOF® identified CTCs (threshold: ≥3 CTCs/15 mL) in 81% (21/26) of blood draws with CTC‐positivity by CellSearch® (threshold: ≥1 CTC/7.5 mL) and in 88% (23/26) of TF+ samples, indicating high sensitivity of our new CyTOF®‐based approach (Table 1). Of note, four blood draws with CTC‐positivity by CyTOF® were devoid of TF but in line with CellSearch® evaluations, supporting highly sensitive detection of CTCs independently of the method used. We also noticed CTC‐positivity by CyTOF® in five blood draws with no CellSearch®‐based CTC detection and differences in absolute CTC numbers that could be due to several reasons, for example, different affinities of antibodies used for identification of CD45−/panCK+/EpCAM+ CTCs, sample preparation or staining procedures (Figure 1A). Providing evidence for detection of tumor cells by CyTOF® and CellSearch® with comparable specificities, we calculated similar correlation coefficients when comparing either CTC count with the TF value, reflecting the amount of tumor‐derived genetic material in the patients' plasma from the same blood draw. Overall, detection by all three methods correlated significantly, underscoring their validities.Proteomic identification of biomarkers in single CTCs has remained a challenge and was the main goal of this project. Here, we aimed at the development of an assay for functional HRD in CTCs based on DDR signals, of the core HR enzyme RAD51, in particular. 28 Using mBC cell lines with defined HRD status, we established that DDR‐based biomarkers showed comparable results in CyTOF® and IF, the common method of their analysis. This was especially important for γH2AX and RAD51, as they serve as markers used in functional HRD tests. 14 , 15 Accordingly, RAD51 accumulation after Olaparib treatment was less pronounced in MDA‐MB‐436 cells with defined HRD, despite comparable γH2AX‐DNA damage levels (Figure 2B).Given that the fragility of patient‐derived CTCs precludes routine ex vivo cultivation and ex vivo functional testing, 29 we exploited in vivo DDRs in CTCs of patients undergoing GT. Therapeutically active compounds included platinum derivatives and PARP inhibitors, for which genomic and/or functional HRD have been shown to predict responses in BC patients, 6 , 10 , 11 , 15 anthracyclines, for which sensitivities were reported in BRCA1/BRCA2‐deficient tumors 30 as well as DNA synthesis inhibitors, since recent research has carved out critical roles of HR components in DNA replication fork protection and reactivation. 23 As expected, we saw a GT‐dependent increase in DNA damage, with significantly more γH2AX+ CTCs from mBC patients undergoing GT. Fractions of γH2AX+ CTCs ranged between 10% and 80% post‐GT, similarly to previously seen by CellSearch® in CTCs from two advanced refractory BC patients treated with Cyclophosphamide and PARP inhibitor. 31 In fact, γH2AX was the only biomarker in our panel showing a significant change between the medians of the values for the different treatment groups.Since both γH2AX and 53BP1 have classically been engaged as DNA damage markers, it was surprising to find that the percentages of γH2AX+ and 53BP1+ CTCs showed a negative correlation (Table 2). However, this observation can be explained by previously published quantitative image‐based cytometry data 32 revealing that 53BP1 accumulates around DSBs primarily in G1‐phase. Our cross‐correlations revealed an association between γH2AX+ CTCs and Cyclin A‐positivity, suggesting a cell cycle arrest in S‐/G2‐phase post‐GT as previously seen in cancer cells 33 and in line with data demonstrating that γH2AX not only detects DSBs but also other types of DNA damage such as replication stress. 22 53BP1 protects DNA ends from resection and untimely homology‐directed repair, particularly in HRD cells, 25 and such antagonistic relationship might also be reflected by the opposing trends of RAD51+/γH2AX+ (or RAD51+) and 53BP1+ CTCs seen in patient #57 during Epirubicin treatment.CTCs undergo EMT to enter the bloodstream, and the majority of CTCs were positive for the EMT marker Vimentin, reassuring that CyTOF®‐based CTC detection captures mBC cells presenting mesenchymal features. Interestingly, percentages of γH2AX+ and Vimentin+ CTCs showed a positive correlation, which strengthens the concept that DNA damage signaling, for example, via the upstream kinases ATM and ATR phosphorylating H2AX, stimulate EMT. 7 Vimentin and RAD51 expression also showed a trend to positively correlate, in line with the fact that RAD51 is coupled with EMT in breast and prostate cancer. 7 Vice versa, EMT has been reported to promote DDRs, triggering a vicious cycle of invasiveness and chemoresistance mechanisms. 7 Further evidence for different phenotypes of γH2AX+ and 53BP1+ CTCs was provided by a negative correlation between 53BP1‐ and Vimentin‐positivities. Consistently, 53BP1 was reported to suppress EMT and therefore Vimentin expression. 34 Such a negative correlation was also noticeable between 53BP1+ CTCs and CTCs expressing the stemness marker ALDH1A3 (Table 2), consistent with recent data showing fewer 53BP1 foci in ALDH1+ compared to ALDH1− cells after irradiation. 35 ALDH1A3, the isoform of ALDH1 which reflects most of ALDH activity in BC, 36 has been associated with cell migration and metastasis. 37 Previous study showed that ALDH1A3 induces mesenchymal differentiation in glioblastoma. 38 We found that ALDH1A3 positively correlates with Vimentin, which altogether suggests that 53BP1− CTCs are endowed with mesenchymal and stem cell features enabling them to migrate through the circulatory system to then disseminate and form metastases. Dynamic changes of not only DDR but also stemness markers, as seen here with patient‐derived CTCs, therefore support the idea that cancer stem cells (CSCs) are not a fixed entity, but rather that CSCness is a state that cells can enter.One of the hallmarks of cancer is genomic instability. Strikingly, a fraction of up to 40%–70% of TNBCs carry mutations in a panel of HR repair pathway genes or feature BRCA1 promoter methylation, resulting in a condition known as genomic scars or HRD. 11 , 39 Such mutational signatures were established to enlarge the fraction of primary BC as well as mBC with genomic HRD from 1% to 5% based on inherited BRCA1/BRCA2 mutations to 20%–30%. 9 , 13 The power of genomic HRD to predict GT responses of TNBC, which has been associated with BRCAness, EMT, stem cell features, and metastasis, 40 has been studied intensively. Ter Brugge and colleagues 10 found HRD based on shallow WGS to predict the platinum response in ≤72% of patient‐derived TNBC xenografts. Genomic HRD was also reported to be associated with carboplatin response and survival in a study involving 225 early TNBC patients. 41 However, BRCA‐proficient mBC with a high HRD score did not seem to benefit from platinum‐based chemotherapy regardless of molecular subtype, 6 and only a small subset of mBC patients with high LOH scores without germline BRCA1/2 mutation could benefit from PARP inhibition with Rucaparib. 42 These findings underscored the need for additional biomarkers to guide platinum/PARP inhibitor use in mBC. Our study included three PE samples from BC patients with pre‐determined genomic HRD status, which was concordant with the respective HRD(CyTOF) status each (Figure 4G and Table S6), suggesting that HRD(CyTOF) may serve as such an additional biomarker, which complements genomic signatures by the treatment‐relevant phenotype of mBC.In this context, it is important to note that DNA‐based tests provide a snapshot from the past by looking at mutagenic events that preceded the evolution of the tumor, which is subject to selection pressures during metastasis and treatment. Functional tests have the advantage to monitor the real‐time HRD status. 15 In this study we compared genomic HRD determined via shallow sequencing of ctDNA and functional HRD determined via RAD51 and γH2AX CyTOF® scores in CTCs from the same blood samples. All‐in‐all, we monitored HRD(CyTOF) in 77% of samples (23/30), which is reminiscent of a recent study with 79% of TNBC biopsies showing RAD51low scores. 11 For comparison, only 44% of our TF+ samples (7/16) showed HRD(ctDNA), which lies in the range of genomic HRD scores of 44% in BC 13 or 59% in TNBC. 11 HRD(ctDNA) and HRD(CyTOF) categorizations were concordant in seven out of 10 samples, that is, in 70% of the cases passing both quality thresholds (Table 1), which is similar to the published concordance of 78% in xenografts. 10 Among the three discordant samples one was derived from TNBC patient #70 without HRD(CyTOF) but borderline HRD(ctDNA). In this case, possible explanations for discordant categorization might be related to the observed LOHs in BRCA2 and ATM (Figure 1E), because reduced levels of BRCA1/2 or ATM were reported to still support HR functions but derepress error‐prone homology‐directed DSB repair pathways generating genomic scars. 10 , 43 , 44 , 45 The two other samples with discordances were obtained from patient #55. In CTCs from this patient we monitored disappearance of HRD(CyTOF) during GT, while HRD(ctDNA) was absent throughout. This observation is in accordance with previous studies revealing that the functional HRD status in BC undergoes changes during GT. 10 Dynamic HRD(CyTOF) changes were also observed in longitudinal samples from patients #57 and #61 as well as from patient #46, in the latter equally affecting HRD(ctDNA). In line with HRD(CyTOF) changes, patients #55, #57, and #61 also featured different BC subtypes at least at one metastatic site compared to the primary tumor, reflecting tumor evolution from the primary tumor to the mBC. Our observations strengthen the idea that HRD(CyTOF) as a functional marker may capture the current HRD phenotype in real‐time and therefore dynamic changes of the same. Genomic instability in tumor cells, that in this study is reflected by ctDNA, indicates that the tumor either is HRD or has been HRD in the past, possibly before resistant subclones emerged. ctDNA may also capture the HR status from tumor cell populations without EpCAM expression, which could explain the concordant absence of HRD(ctDNA) and of HRD(CyTOF) in cells from patient #55 when gating via CD45−/panCK+ rather than via the stringent CTC marker combination CD45−/panCK+/EpCAM+ (Tables 1 and S5). Ultimately, these findings suggest that a combination of genomic and functional HRD tests should be employed to ascertain the HRD status in CTCs.Lastly, we found that the presence of ALDH1A3+ CTCs positively correlates with the survival of the treated mBC patients. ALDH1A3 was reported to be expressed in CTCs having acquired CSC and mesenchymal features 46 and is commonly associated with chemoresistance and worse survival in many cancers including mBC, though only at baseline and no longer when monitored during chemotherapy. 47 , 48 , 49 Notably, ALDH1A3 plays a non‐enzymatic role in drug detoxification, namely through gene expression changes and activation of signaling pathways such as the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway. However, ALDH1A3 has also been connected with better outcomes in TP53 wildtype ovarian cancer, so that its effects might also be cell type‐, context‐, and treatment‐dependent. 49 Conspicuously, our data further suggest an association of RAD51 expression in CTCs towards the end of treatment with worse survival, which is in accordance with literature data revealing high RAD51 mRNA expression in BC, particularly in TNBC and advanced stages with poor prognosis. 50 These findings highlight the potential of RAD51 overexpression as a chemoresistance mechanism. 28 However, for a better understanding of the prognostic and predictive values of ALDH1A3‐ and RAD51‐positivity in CTCs, larger patient cohorts will have to be involved in future studies. In conclusion, we could show that CyTOF® is a valuable method not only to count CTCs but also to monitor dynamic changes in their DNA repair and differentiation status in response to administration of genotoxic drugs.