BackgroundFabry disease is an X‐linked lysosomal storage disorder due to a deficiency of α‐galactosidase A (α‐gal A) activity. Our goal was to correct the enzyme deficiency in Fabry patients by transferring the cDNA for α‐gal A into their CD34+ hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells (HSPCs). Overexpression of α‐gal A leads to secretion of the hydrolase; which can be taken up and used by uncorrected bystander cells. Gene‐augmented HSPCs can circulate and thus provide sustained systemic correction. Interim results from this ‘first‐in‐the‐world’ Canadian FACTs (Fabry Disease Clinical Research and Therapeutics) trial were published in 2021. Herein we report 5‐year ‘End‐of‐Study’ results. 1INTRODUCTIONFabry disease (OMIM 301500) is an X‐linked lysosomal storage disorder (LSD) originally found to be due to impaired hydrolysis of the terminal galactose of the sphingolipid ceramide trihexoside (globotriaosylceramide, Gb3) by the enzyme alpha‐galactosidase A (α‐gal A), encoded by the GLA gene. 1 , 2 The realisation that it was a lack of the enzyme activity resulting in accumulated sphingolipids with terminal galactose residues has been the mainstay of understanding this disease. Principal treatments have involved replacement of this enzyme activity using various products or enhancement of misfolded lysosomal activity using chaperones. 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 Therapeutic goals focus on reducing the clinical burden of the disorder from cardiac dysfunction and renal insufficiency, along with reducing the higher risk of stroke and lessening chronic pain. 7 Since the start of enzyme replacement therapy (ET), this method of treatment has been the most commonly used worldwide. ET involves biweekly enzyme infusions, with products that have a half‐life of less than 2 h. 8 , 9 A pegylated form of the enzyme has been approved in the United States that has demonstrated a half‐life between 53 and 121 h, 10 which still requires biweekly intravenous infusions. An oral chaperone (migalastat) has also been approved but only certain GLA mutations are amenable. 4 Migalastat was not approved for clinical use at the time of initiation of this study. The use of ET means a biweekly intravenous infusion for life, requiring infusions at a hospital, infusion centre or at home, repeated vascular access, the potential use of central lines and the complications that accompany them. Reimbursement issues are problematic for intravenous or oral drugs. Patients may not be able to move to a geographical region where coverage is provided thereby limiting lifestyle choices and career goals. As an alternative to the burden and cost of lifelong use of medication, this prompted a need for a ‘one and done’ approach. There are two broad approaches to gene therapy in this context: lentiviral or adeno‐associated virus (AAV) modalities. An ex vivo lentiviral approach, which transduces multi‐potent haematopoietic stem cells, such as CD34+ lymphocytes, that populate the bone marrow, can provide systemic production of α‐gal A. Direct AAV injection has a higher tropism for the liver, but this approach cannot be used in patients who have a cross‐reactive antibody to the AAV vector serotype being used. Since the AAV transduction is primarily performed in non‐dividing cells, the effective dose of the vector can also reduce over time. In Fabry disease, α‐gal A can be taken up by uninfected bystander cells, similar to exogenous intravenous ET, to provide cross‐correction in those cells.The FACTs (Fabry Disease Clinical Research and Therapeutics) study involved recombinant lentivirus (LV)‐mediated transfer of a codon‐optimised cDNA for human α‐gal A into haematopoietic stem/progenitor cells (HSPCs) from Fabry patients followed by autologous re‐infusions of the cell products (clinicaltrials.gov, #NCT02800070). The study was a non‐randomised, open‐label, multi‐centre clinical trial to evaluate the safety and efficacy of LV‐transduced HSPCs for 5 years in males with classical Fabry disease who were already on ET. The primary endpoints (safety) were determined using criteria from the National Cancer Institute of Canada (NCIC) Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE). Safety monitoring assessments were performed for cardiac and renal function as well as for stroke, which are the three principal clinical outcome‐related organ systems in Fabry disease. Secondary analyses included: (a) changes in α‐gal A enzyme activity within the plasma, lymphocytes and bone marrow, (b) changes in Gb3 levels in plasma and urine, (c) changes in lyso‐Gb3 and related analogue levels in plasma and urine, (d) persistence of LV‐transduced cells as measured by quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) and (e) determination of anti‐α‐gal A antibody titres.Interim results and safety data were published in 2021. 11 In addition to the interim publication on safety and clinical outcomes, a recent paper showed sustained reductions in Gb3 and globotriaosylsphingosine (lyso‐Gb3) levels in our treated Fabry patients. 12 Longitudinal evaluations of engraftment in our Fabry disease patients receiving LV‐mediated gene therapy were also performed; there was evidence for persistent polyclonal haematopoiesis and no evidence of clonal dominance in any patient. 13 Examining clonal expansion is relevant because lentiviral constructs integrate into host DNA and have the potential to dysregulate proto‐oncogenes, which can manifest with clonal expansion and haematological malignancies. 14 Herein, we present the 5‐year End‐of‐Study results from that FACTs trial, with ongoing safety monitoring outcomes, adverse clinical event assessments, and renal and cardiac function analyses.