ConclusionBPMA-S6 may represent a promising point-of-care test (POCT) for the diagnosis, disease monitoring, and assessment of LN flare. DiscussionGiven the heterogeneity of lupus pathogenesis, no individual biomarker can accurately reflect disease activity and its comorbidities (e.g., LN). Different aspects of the pathophysiology or manifestations of lupus or LN may be driven by distinct molecular and signaling pathways. Therefore, identifying key molecules involved in these pathogenic processes is essential for diagnostics, disease monitoring, and therapeutic targeting. Indeed, in recent years, there have been ongoing efforts to identify biomarker panels or composite biomarkers for LN. Proteinuria is an important clinical parameter of LN; however, persistent proteinuria may largely result from preexisting renal damage and may not necessarily indicate ongoing or new renal inflammation or flare during disease progression.It is worth noting that we are the first to construct a biomarker panel assay on a single chip for the simultaneous detection of five protein biomarkers and anti-dsDNA antibodies to monitor LN disease activity. Mechanistically, the rationale for selecting the six biomarkers in our BPMA-S6 panel includes the following: (1) anti-dsDNA autoantibody is a conventional vital clinical marker of lupus; more importantly, it can form immune complexes with crossreactive antigens, which are subsequently deposited in the kidney parenchyma to initiate lupus nephritis. The synergy of anti-dsDNA antibody-mediated immune complex formation and classical complement activation, along with immune cell infiltration, release of chemokines, cytokines, and proteolytic enzymes, and oxidative damage, can induce kidney inflammation and subsequent organ damage (47); (2) activated leukocyte cell adhesion molecule (ALCAM, also named as CD166) is a cell adhesion glycoprotein expressed on antigen-presenting cells that mediates immune cell adhesion and migration, co-stimulation of T cells, and sustains T-cell activation. It is a ligand of CD6, and the CD6/ALCAM pathway promotes lupus nephritis via T-cell-mediated responses (48). Elevated levels of ALCAM were observed in both serum (this study) and urine (49) of LN patients compared to healthy controls; (3) VCAM-1, a member of the integrin and immunoglobulin superfamily, is induced on endothelial cells in response to inflammatory cytokines, binds to integrin partners on leukocytes, and is elevated in the urine of LN patients (50). Our previous studies showed that urinary VCAM-1 levels were correlated with the renal pathology activity index in LN (51). (4) TNFRSF1B (also known as TNFRII or P75) is a transmembrane receptor for TNF. Its induction has been correlated with the primary site of renal injury (52), and it was found to be elevated in the serum of LN patients (53); (5) osteopontin (OPN) is a pleiotropic protein expressed by various cells. It is upregulated in response to injury and inflammation and plays a role in regulating immune responses (54). Elevated levels of OPN were also observed in the serum of LN patients (53); (6) VSIG4 is a novel transmembrane complement receptor belonging to the immunoglobulin superfamily (also known as CRIg). It functions as an intrinsic inhibitor of complement activation via the alternative pathway. Administration of CRIg-Fc to MRL/lpr mice resulted in reduced kidney inflammation, proteinuria, and pyuria (55). We recently found that VSIG4 was elevated in the serum of LN patients and was associated with renal pathology (Tang et al.).To date, most biomarker panel studies in LN have focused on urinary biomarkers. For example, transferrin, α1-acid-glycoprotein (AGP), ceruloplasmin, and lipocalin-type prostaglandin D synthetase (L-PGDS) were proposed as a biomarker panel for pediatric LN. The initial evaluation of this panel demonstrated an area under the ROC curve of 0.84-0.88 for assessing LN activity and damage (56). In another study, urinary biomarkers eotaxin 1, GM-CSF, IFN-a2, IFN-g, IL-1a, IL-1b, IL-6, IL-8, IP-10, monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1), MIP-1b, PDGF-BB, lipocalin 2, TWEAK, OPG, cystatin C, and NAG were used to build Random Forest models, which demonstrated a higher AUC and statistical significance compared to models based on traditional clinical markers alone (AUC = 0.79 vs. AUC = 0.61) (57). In a more recent study, individual ELISA measurements of urinary protein biomarkers L-PGDS, ICAM-1, VCAM-1, along with conventional biomarkers anti-dsDNA, C3, and C4, were used to develop a biomarker panel that showed excellent ability to identify renal flare (AUC = 0.98) in a small cohort of LN patients with flare (N = 8) (58). In a more recent study, protein biomarkers adiponectin, EGF, and T-cell immunoglobulin mucin-1/kidney injury molecule-1 (TIM-1/KIM1) were combined with baseline clinical parameters—baseline uPCR, baseline eGFR, race, and C4—to construct a biomarker panel using Random Forest modeling. The combined biomarkers were able to reflect treatment responses with an AUC = 0.74 in an internal crossvalidation cohort of LN, in which the protein biomarkers were measured using Luminex custom assay kits (R&D System) and the FlexMap 3D system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) (14). To date, more than 20 proteomic or genomic biomarker panels for lupus have been proposed (13). However, less than 10% of these contain more than 4 biomarkers and the majority of them focused on distinguishing LN from Healthy controls with moderate performance. In comparison, our BPMA-S6 can distinguish LN from HC (AUC = 1) and LN-Active from LN-Inactive (AUC = 0.92). Moreover, our six-plex biomarker pane; demonstrated excellent discriminative value in identifying LN flare in both the training dataset (AUC = 0.93) and testing dataset (AUC = 0.82) within a longitudinal LN cohort.It is important to note that the six biomarkers in our BPMA-S6 are representative of several major pathogenic pathways of lupus nephritis, including autoantibody production and B-cell activation or migration (anti-dsDNA, VCAM-1, ALCAM) (59–61), T-cell activation (ALCAM, OPN, TNFRSF1B) (48, 62, 63), and complement activation (VSIG4) (55). More importantly, the six biomarkers can be measured simultaneously on a single chip developed in this study, highlighting the great potential of this platform for diagnostics, disease monitoring, or LN flare assessment in clinical practice or clinical trials.Additionally, we refined the biomarker panel using a LASSO regression model, a machine-learning technique that selects the most relevant features while discarding redundant ones (14, 64). Our recently discovered novel serum biomarker, VSGI4, has demonstrated excellent performance in distinguishing between LN-Active and LN-Inactive nephritis, as well as in reflecting renal pathology activity (Tang et al.), and has significantly contributed to the overall performance of our BPMA-S6.Similar to paper-based LFAs and vertical flow assays (VFAs), BPMA also offers attractive features such as low cost and portability for clinical use. Importantly, BPMA overcomes limitations seen in LFAs, including issues with multiplexability, the hook effect, and false-negative results. More importantly, BPMA exhibits excellent sensitivity, quantitation capability, and, particularly, multiplexability (65–67). It is worth noting that by optimizing the protocol, we were able to shorten the sample reaction time in the array by > 10-fold—achieving similar detection performance with a 10-min incubation time as with the original 2-h incubation. In addition to using florescent dye Cy3 to detect the array signal, we successfully developed a robust colorimetric-based detection method using SeramunBlau, which simplifies array imaging and eliminates the need for an expensive fluoroimager. This makes BPMA-S6 a more promising platform for implementation in point-of-care settings (68). After optimizing the reaction conditions, the colorimetric detector demonstrated comparable performance to the fluorescence detector in BPMA-S6, including a similar dynamic range of signal detection, sensitivity, specificity, and disease discrimination.Although our 3D-printed chip cassette and shortened incubation protocol have significantly increased the rapidity of detection, the current protocol for BPMA-S6 assay still includes a washing step. An improved protocol that eliminates the need for washing is desirable. Nevertheless, the BPMA-S6 system may represent a promising serum biomarker panel and detection system for future homecare or community care of LN.