METHODS:Three-month-old C57BL/6J male and female mice received very low dose lipopolysaccharide for 4 weeks; in addition to lipopolysaccharide, during the fourth week, mice were randomized to receive either anti-mouse IL-6 monoclonal antibody 200 μg or IgG1 isotype control. Thrombosis of the right common carotid artery was induced by endothelial-targeted laser injury. Coagulation factors and platelet reactivity were assessed in treated mice and controls. Platelets were isolated from whole blood and their reactivity to different chemical stimuli was measured by fluorescence-activated cell sorting. Additionally, whole blood samples from patients with a history of percutaneous coronary intervention were incubated ex vivo with either ziltivekimab biosimilar or IgG1 isotype control. Platelet reactivity at rest and in response to diverse chemical stimuli was quantified by fluorescence-activated cell sorting. MethodsThe data that support the findings of this study, as well as analytic methods and study materials, are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.AnimalsThree-month-old C57BL/6J wild-type male and female mice received very low dose lipopolysaccharide intraperitoneally for 4 weeks to induce a state of chronic low-grade inflammation, as previously described.12,13 During the past week, mice were randomized to receive in addition to lipopolysaccharide either anti-mouse IL-6 mAb (BE0046, Bio X Cell, PA) 200 μg IP every other day or the same amount of IgG1 isotype control (BE0290, Bio X Cell, PA), as previously described.14,15 Ten-week old animals were purchased from Charles River Laboratories (Lyon, France) and acclimatized to the animal facility located in the Schlieren Campus of the University of Zurich for 2 weeks. Animals were raised in optimal hygiene conditions, with a stable temperature of 20 to 22 °C, and fed with an ad libitum chow diet (Kliba Nafag 3336, 17 MJ/kg; Kliba Nafag, Kaiseraugst, Switzerland). Mice were sequentially numbered and allocated to the intervention groups using a casual number generator (https://www.calculator.net/random-number-generator.html). Only 1 experimenter (S.B.) knew the allocation of the animals. The allocation template was disclosed after statistical analysis. Animal experiments were approved by the ethics committee of the Canton Zurich Veterinary Office (license ZH148/2023). Animals meeting humane end points were euthanized, and collected data were excluded from the analysis. Sex differences and their interaction with the treatment were not analyzed in the current study.Photochemically Induced Arterial ThrombosisBoth groups of mice underwent endothelial-targeted photochemical injury of the right common carotid artery to induce arterial thrombosis. The detailed description of this technique has been previously reported.16 Briefly, Rose Bengal (62.6 mg/kg of body weight) was administered by tail-vein injection in anesthetized mice. Mice were placed in a supine position under a dissecting microscope, and the right common carotid artery was exposed by a midline cervical incision. A Doppler-flow probe was applied around the right common carotid artery and connected to a flowmeter. Five to 10 minutes after Rose Bengal injection, a 1.5 mW green light laser was directed to the site of injury at 6 cm from the artery, until thrombosis occurred. Occlusion was defined as blood flow below 0.1 mL/min for at least 1 minute, and the time-to-occlusion was used as a measure of arterial thrombosis efficacy. Cyclic flow variations were recorded, and thrombus embolization was defined as an increase of blood flow to above 0.1 mL/min after a previous decrease below said level lasting <1 minute. Clot embolization episodes reflect thrombus stability.16,17Platelet Reactivity Assay in Murine SamplesBlood samples were terminally drawn by cardiac puncture under anesthesia and collected in sodium citrate 0.1 M. A 50 μL aliquot of whole blood was employed for cell count (ScilVet ABCplus, Horiba, Kyoto, Japan). Platelet-rich plasma was obtained by centrifugation at 200g for 8 minutes, then incubated for 10 minutes at 37 °C with the addition of 0.02 U/mL of potato apyrase (A6535; Sigma-Aldrich, MO) and 1 μL/mL prostaglandin E1 (538903; Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) as described before.17 Platelets were isolated from platelet-rich plasma by centrifugation (800g for 15 minutes), then washed twice in modified Tyrode-HEPES buffer (5 mmol/L HEPES, 137 mmol/L NaCl, 0.42 mmol/L NaH2PO4, 2 mmol/L KCl, 12 mmol/L NaHCO3, 5.5 mmol/L glucose, 0.35% bovine serum albumin, and pH 7.35) with 1 μg/mL prostaglandin E1. Afterward, washed platelets were resuspended in modified Tyrode-HEPES buffer with 1 mmol/L CaCl2 and 1 mmol/L MgCl2 and activated with ADP (10 μM, 01905; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO), Collagen-rP (collagen-related peptide; 20 μg/mL, CRP-XL; Camb Collabs, Littleport, United Kingdom) or thrombin from human plasma (0.1 U/mL; T6884; Merck, Darmstadt, Germany). Agonists’ concentrations were specified according to previous ex vivo platelets aggregation assay.12,16,18 In parallel, washed platelets were labeled with fluorescent anti-mouse antibodies against CD (cluster derived) 41 (1.3 μg/mL; BioLegend, San Diego, CA), CD62P (0.5 μg/mL; eBioscience, San Diego, CA) and activated Gp (glycoprotein) IIb/IIIa (JON/A, 0.75 μg/mL; EMFRET Analytics, Würzburg, Germany). CD41 was employed as platelet-specific membrane marker, whereas CD62P and activated GpIIb/IIIa were employed as activation markers, as previously described.19–21 Platelets reactivity will be measured by fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS–LSR II Fortessa 4 L; BD & Company, Franklin Lakes, NJ), acquiring 10 000 CD41-positive events, as mean fluorescence intensity of CD62P and activated GpIIb/IIIa.PatientsFifteen (15) patients subjected to percutaneous coronary intervention 6 months earlier were enrolled in this study. According to the guidelines of the European Society of Cardiology, all these subjects qualify as very high risk of major adverse cardiovascular events.22 The study was approved by the ethics committee of Klinikum rechts der Isar, Munich, Germany (no. 2023-77-S-SR) and was conducted in accordance with the 1964 Declaration of Helsinki and its later amendments. All patients signed a written informed consent. Venous blood from each patient was collected in the morning after at least 8 hours of fasting and stored in tubes with 3.2% citrate. Whole blood samples were preincubated with 1.5 µg/mL ziltivekimab biosimilar (PX-TA-1613-100, Proteogenix, Schiltigheim, France)23 or IgG1 isotype (PTX-17897, Proteogenix, Schiltigheim, France) for 30 minutes at room temperature.Platelets Reactivity Assay in Human SamplesWhole blood samples were incubated with ADP (5 μM, 01905; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO), Collagen-rP (2 μg/mL, CrP-XL; Camb Collabs, Littleport, United Kingdom), and TRAP-6 (thrombin receptor agonist peptide-6) amide (10 μM, 4031274; Bachem, Bubendorf, Switzerland) at room temperature. In parallel, samples were stained with anti-human antibodies against CD41 (1 μg/mL, 303730; Bio Legend, San Diego, CA) and CD62P (7.5 μg/mL, 550561; BD Biosciences; Franklin Lakes, NJ). After incubation in the dark for 30 minutes, the whole blood samples were fixed, and erythrocytes were lysed with Lyse/Fix Buffer (558049; BD Biosciences, Franklin Lakes, NJ) for 10 minutes at room temperature. CD41 was employed as a platelet-specific membrane marker, whereas CD62P was employed as activation markers, as previously described.19,20 Platelet reactivity was measured by fluorescence-activated cell sorting (Gallios, Beckman Coulter, Brea, CA), acquiring 10 000 CD41-positive events, as mean fluorescence intensity of CD62P.Statistical AnalysisStatistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism 6 software (GraphPad Software Inc, La Jolla, CA). The ROUT method was employed to identify outliers for a set Q=1%. Outliers were a priori excluded from inferential analyses (n=2 mice, both in the isotype control group). Normality of data was assessed by the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. For the comparison of means, we used the paired and unpaired 2-tailed Student t test for normally distributed variables, or the Mann-Whitney U test and the paired Wilcoxon test for non-normally distributed variables. To compare ≥3 groups, 1-way and 2-way ANOVA with Bonferroni post hoc test for multiple comparisons were employed as appropriate. A P<0.05 was considered statistically significant.Methods description for hemostasis assessment in mice and in vitro cell experiments (Figure S1) are reported in the Supplementary Methods. For a summary of methods, please refer to the Major Resources Table in the Supplemental Material. Statistical AnalysisStatistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism 6 software (GraphPad Software Inc, La Jolla, CA). The ROUT method was employed to identify outliers for a set Q=1%. Outliers were a priori excluded from inferential analyses (n=2 mice, both in the isotype control group). Normality of data was assessed by the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. For the comparison of means, we used the paired and unpaired 2-tailed Student t test for normally distributed variables, or the Mann-Whitney U test and the paired Wilcoxon test for non-normally distributed variables. To compare ≥3 groups, 1-way and 2-way ANOVA with Bonferroni post hoc test for multiple comparisons were employed as appropriate. A P<0.05 was considered statistically significant.Methods description for hemostasis assessment in mice and in vitro cell experiments (Figure S1) are reported in the Supplementary Methods. For a summary of methods, please refer to the Major Resources Table in the Supplemental Material. Supplemental MaterialSupplemental MethodsTable S1Figure S1Major Resources TableARRIVE Guidelines