ConclusionsHigher relative baseline intake of omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids is associated with lesser progression of blood-based biomarkers of Alzheimer's disease. Consuming healthy fatty acids may help prevent accumulation of Alzheimer's disease-related pathological changes. 4DiscussionIn a multi-ethnic community-based cohort of older adults without baseline dementia, individuals with high tertile O-3 intake had a lesser progression of AD-related biomarkers across subsequent visits compared to those with low intake, including a lesser decrease in PCA2 score, a lesser increase in P-tau181 level and a lesser decrease in Aβ42/40 ratio. In addition, those with high O-6 intake tertile had a lesser increase in P-tau181 and GFAP levels compared to those with low intake tertile. Most of these relationships persisted after adjusting for cardiovascular risk factor score.The results suggest that individuals with higher relative intakes of both O-3 and O-6 PUFAs had slower progression of AD pathophysiology over time. This protective association corresponded mostly to AD-specific changes (Aβ42/40 and P-tau181) rather than less specific markers of nervous system injury (GFAP and NfL). This distinction underscores the possibility that PUFA, especially O-3, might modulate pathological processes central to AD, such as amyloid plaque formation and tau pathology, rather than general neuronal damage or inflammation. Associations of each of the individual O-3 PUFAs (EPA, DPA and DHA) with biomarkers were similar to those identified for O-3 in the primary analysis, and they suggest that the individual PUFAs have similar relationships with AD biomarkers. It is unclear why individuals with the highest O-3 intake had a longitudinal increase in PCA2 score, increase in Aβ42/40 ratio (component 1 of PCA2 score) and decrease P-tau181, but no significant change in P-tau181/Aβ42 (component 2 of PCA2 score). However, the numeric change in P-tau181/Aβ42 associated with high tertile O-3 intake was in the expected direction. Further studies could explore the temporal sequence of biomarker changes in response to O-3 intake.We hypothesized that dietary intake of key nutrients would reduce risk of AD, reflected in a lesser increase in biomarker levels, via a reduced burden of vascular risk factors. A growing body of literature suggests that vascular comorbidities may influence the levels of plasma biomarkers [, , ]. In one biracial cohort, individuals with diabetes had lower GFAP levels, those with history of stroke had higher NfL, and those with chronic kidney disease had higher NfL and lower P-tau181 . Other studies have shown variation in white matter hyperintensity, a marker for microvascular disease, by P-tau181, P-tau217  and GFAP levels . EPA and DHA were associated with reduced risk of cardiovascular disease in prospective cohort studies . In prospective cohorts and randomized controlled trials, plant-based oils enriched in the O-6 PUFA linoleic acid largely seem protective against coronary artery disease . Nonetheless, several of the associations we identified between O-3 and O-6 intake and change in biomarkers persisted after adjusting for CVRF score, suggesting the nutrients might be associated with the AD-related pathological markers through pathways independent of vascular risk.There are several studies linking intake of O-3 PUFAs with a lesser burden of amyloid pathology. One study showed that higher intake of O-3, vitamin B12 and vitamin D was associated with lower positron emission tomography (PET) amyloid burden in cognitively normal participants . Another study reported higher O-3 intake was associated with lower level of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) AD biomarkers in participants with mild AD, although inconsistent results on O-3 and CSF biomarkers also exist . These suggest that higher O-3 intake may protect against amyloid pathological changes preceding and in early AD. We found that PUFAs were not associated with P-tau181 at baseline in the cross-sectional analysis but predicted less increase in phospho-tau longitudinally. One possible explanation of this is that, at baseline, the tau pathology might still be minimal in the study population, making it difficult to detect significant associations. In contrast, the change over many years of follow-up may better capture individual differences in tau dynamics. An alternative explanation is that cross-sectional P-tau levels are likely influenced by various individual factors such as age, metabolism, genetic predisposition, and comorbidities. In comparison, longitudinal changes in P-tau reflect within-individual trajectories and may be less affected by these external sources of variability.There are few other observational studies on the influence of fatty acids on blood-based AD biomarkers, with varying results. In a cross-sectional study in our cohort, individuals with higher O-3 consumption had reduced plasma Aβ42 . A multidomain interventional study including an O-3 supplement improved composite cognitive scores in non-demented individuals with low plasma Aβ42/40 ratio indicating risk of AD . In a randomized controlled trial, treatment with a nutritional supplement containing EPA and DHA O-3 fatty acids did not affect P-tau181 or GFAP levels after 1 year compared to placebo .Biological mechanisms that might be responsible for the association between O-3 and AD biomarkers are unclear. PUFAs are critical components of neuronal membranes, contributing to membrane fluidity and proper functioning of membrane-bound ion channels . However, membrane PUFAs are also highly susceptible to lipid peroxidation due to their double bonds. Peroxidized PUFAs can initiate ferroptotic cell death by iron dependent enzymes , which leads to release of pro-inflammatory signals and activates microglia and astrocytes, contributing to AD. In a study of hypertensive older adults, oxidized products of O-3 and O-6 were associated with increased white matter hyperintensity and poorer executive function . However, adequate levels of O-3 PUFAs have been shown to reduce oxidative stress by several mechanisms. They support synthesis of glutathione, which detoxifies lipid peroxides, and they improve expression of antioxidant enzymes, like glutathione peroxidase 4 . Lastly, they promote the production of specialized pro-resolving mediators, such as resolvins and protectins, which help counteract peroxidation damage . Overall, O-3 PUFAs may exert neuroprotective effects at least partly by reducing inflammation and oxidative stress.Our study has several limitations. Dietary intake, which we assessed once at the initial visit, may have changed over time. However, we previously showed that dietary habits appear stable over time within individuals . Misclassification of dietary data may be present, as the standard SFFQ used in our study might not fully capture all foods consumed by our multi-ethnic, elderly population, particularly the culturally specific or traditional foods. Given the observational nature of our study, we cannot make definite conclusions about whether intake of these key nutrients caused a lesser progression in biomarkers. It is possible that there was residual confounding of demographic and social factors with nutrient intake and the progression of AD pathophysiology. In addition, many individuals were missing PCA scores and/or CVRF score.Plasma biomarkers, minimally invasive way to monitor AD-related brain changes, may provide valuable insight into the influence of diet on progression of AD pathophysiology before the onset of cognitive symptoms. This study suggests that individuals with calculated high tertiles of O-3 and O-6 PUFAs from food have lesser progression of AD biomarkers over time compared to those with low intakes. It also suggests that this protective association may occur separately from the effects of nutrition on cardiovascular risk. More studies are needed to understand this association, and to identify whether there might be individuals that could benefit from increased O-3 and O-6 intake, in the broad strategy to impact AD.