ConclusionsThis study identified novel biomarkers associated with EoE and proposes a panel, together with symptoms, for effective discrimination between active EoE, EoE in remission, and healthy individuals. The findings may contribute to a less invasive diagnostic method and may be a potential surveillance tool for pediatric EoE patients. 4DISCUSSIONIn this prospective cohort study of 105 children with active EoE, EoE in remission and healthy, we have identified biomarkers, both single and combinations, associated to EoE diagnosis. Elevated levels of single serum biomarkers (AEC, EDN, 15(S)‐HETE, both total and sIgG4, and sIgE) were seen in active EoE compared to healthy individuals. AEC, EDN, sIgE to egg white, and wheat in combination and together with typical EoE symptoms showed promising potential to differentiate between active EoE, EoE in remission and healthy subjects with an AUC of 0.92. Furthermore, we were able to propose cutoff values for biomarkers, of which the combination of three (AEC, EDN, sIgE to egg white, or wheat) could accurately distinguish active EoE from healthy individuals. Analysis of biomarkers in the subgroup that transitioned from active disease to EoE in remission showed that sIgG4 and sIgE to milk and EDN appeared to be of importance as the level of these biomarkers decreased in the remission group.Despite the increased understanding of EoE in recent years, several aspects of the condition are still incompletely understood, and reliable biomarkers are lacking. We found that levels of both AEC and EDN were highest in the EoE active individuals followed by EoE in remission and lowest levels were observed in the healthy individuals. These associations have previously been described and are known markers of eosinophilic inflammation. 4 , 6 , 16 In accordance with our study, lower levels of AEC and EDN are also known to correlate with disease remission. 17 , 18 However, these biomarkers are also observed as with elevated levels in other diseases such as asthma and other allergic conditions and are therefore not specific enough to be used as a predictive marker for EoE. 6 Similarly, levels of sIgG4 and sIgE were also increased in EoE patients compared to healthy individuals, which is in accordance with current knowledge. 7 , 8 , 19 , 20 , 21 , 22 In addition, we analyzed a less explored biomarker in the context of EoE, the lipid mediator 15(S)‐HETE, which was found to be elevated in EoE patients compared to healthy individuals, both before and after adjusting for confounders. A recent study suggested the importance of 15(S)‐HETE in EoE, however, it did not observe a significant difference between active EoE and controls. 9 This lack of distinction may be attributed to limited sample material, as suggested by the authors. The lipid mediator 15(S)‐HETE originates from arachidonic acid which, by the metabolism of the 15‐lipoxygenase (ALOX15) or cyclooxygenase enzymes, exerts a range of physiological functions in the body. 23 Genes associated with esophageal narrowing in EoE included ALOX15, 24 which has been found upregulated in esophageal mucosal biopsies of individuals with EoE compared to healthy controls. 25 In addition, metabolites from 15(S)‐HETE, such as 5‐oxo‐15(S)‐HETE (lipoxin A4), are known to be inflammatory modulators in other chronic inflammatory diseases such as asthma and atopic dermatitis, 26 , 27 but its role in EoE is unclear. 15(S)‐HETE can, for example in asthma, act proinflammatory by activating the leukotriene B4 receptor 2 (BLT2), 28 but also anti‐inflammatory, through activation of peroxisome proliferator‐activated receptor γ (PPAR‐ γ). 29 One study has described higher levels of PPAR‐γ in esophageal biopsies of EoE patients compared to healthy individuals. 30 However, the existing evidence regarding the pro‐ or anti‐inflammatory nature of 15(S)‐HETE in different diseases remains inconclusive.Because EoE has high comorbidity with other immune‐driven diseases, for example, asthma and food allergy, 13 , 31 and both sIgG4 and sIgE levels can vary with age and food intake, 8 , 19 , 32 it is important to adjust for potential confounders and consider their possible influence on the investigated biomarkers. In our study, we adjusted for factors that have previously been demonstrated to be important in relation to EoE after a principal component analysis before performing the multinomial logistic regression analysis. After adjustment for milk elimination, pollen allergy, food allergy, age, and sex, the biomarkers AEC, EDN, 15(S)‐HETE, sIgG4 to Bos d 4, Bos d 5, Bos d 8, peanut, Ara h2, and egg white, and sIgE to milk still had a positive correlation with active EoE and EoE in remission compared to healthy individuals.We conducted additional investigations to assess the possibility of creating a predictive biomarker panel. Our findings showed that four biomarkers (AEC, EDN, sIgE for egg white, and wheat) were sufficient to effectively differentiate between active EoE, EoE in remission, and healthy individuals. The inclusion of three symptoms in the analysis further enhanced the predictive capability, resulting in an AUC of 0.92. A previous study has shown that a panel of six plasma biomarkers; galectin‐10 (CLC/GAL‐10), eosinophil cationic protein (ECP), EDN, Eotaxin‐3 and major basic protein‐1 (MBP‐1) and AEC can distinguish patient with EoE diagnosis from healthy controls with an AUC of 0.90. 5 Another study, where 15(S)‐HETE as well as AEC and 12 cytokines were included in a panel, show an AUC of 0.96 to differentiate active EoE from healthy controls. 9 Given that the biomarkers investigated in our study are common standard method analyses conducted in most hospital laboratories, and that patient symptoms are routinely recorded, our panel emerges as a convenient and minimally invasive method for diagnosing the status of EoE. For potential clinical utility, we then calculated optimal cutoff levels for the biomarkers that found to be most important in the comparison between the groups of active EoE and healthy individuals, and by combining three biomarkers (AEC, sIgE wheat, and sIgE to egg white), we were able to achieve a PPV of 100% and an NPV of 75%. Previous studies have suggested cutoff values for AEC, EDN, and Eotaxin‐3, which, when combined, yielded a PPV of 88% and an NPV of 70%, but with a smaller number of patients than in our study. 6 Furthermore, we included the children with reflux esophagitis in the healthy group and then obtained new cutoff levels but still satisfactory values of PPV, 86% and an NPV of 83%. To our knowledge, there is no other study that has achieved the high precision that we have shown in our study, nevertheless, these values have to be validated in separate clinical studies.The longitudinal part of our study tracked 11 individuals as they transitioned from active EoE to remission, examining biomarker changes at the individual level. Notably, sIgG4 levels decreased, even for specific allergens that had not been eliminated from the diet. A plausible explanation may be that when inflammation in the esophagus decreases, the damaged epithelial barrier begins to heal, resulting in a reduced ability for allergens to cross the esophageal barrier. Consequently, the sIgE and sIgG4 levels may decrease in the blood. This was also in line with our findings of unchanged sIgG4 levels in the patients who continued with an active EoE. The reduction of sIgG4‐levels to the milk allergens Bos d 4, Bos d 5, and Bos d 8 in patients with EoE who excluded milk from their diet and came into remission has been shown previously, 8 but without describing how other sIgG4 markers changed. In addition, levels of sIgE to milk also decreased upon remission in our study, possibly due to the combination of milk elimination and barrier restoration. The longitudinal variations of sIgE in EoE patients when they go into remission have, to our knowledge, not been previously studied.This study's robustness is underscored by the large cohort of well‐characterized patients. The inclusion of diagnostic biopsies, confirming the esophageal status of all participants, adds further validity to our results. However, it is essential to acknowledge certain limitations. The different treatments to achieve remission introduces a heterogeneity, and the absence of information on the severity of allergic diseases and allergic rhinitis represent limitations. Moreover, despite the substantial patient population included, this study lacked sufficient power to conduct subgroup analyses on different treatments.In conclusion, our study has shown a positive correlation between elevated levels of serum biomarkers (AEC, EDN, 15(S)‐HETE, and IgG4) and EoE. In addition, we have proposed an innovative panel of readily available plasma biomarkers (AEC, EDN, and sIgE to egg white, or wheat) with cutoff values, which together with typical EoE symptoms appear to be able to distinguish active EoE from EoE in remission and from healthy individuals.For longitudinal monitoring of EoE, sIgG4, sIgE, and EDN would be important biomarkers to assess the regression of the esophageal inflammation.