CONCLUSIONS AND PRACTICAL IMPLICATIONSThis CPG provides performance‐based, brand‐agnostic recommendations for the use of BBMs in the diagnostic workup of suspected AD within specialized care settings. By linking recommendations to a systematic review and associated living updates, and using a robust and transparent methodology, the guideline ensures scientific rigor, adaptability, and sustained relevance as evidence evolves. Clinicians are encouraged to stay informed about emerging paradigms—such as biomarker combinations or ratios and multi‐threshold testing—that may further refine the diagnostic accuracy of BBMs as the field evolves. 3.2Summary of identified studiesForty‐nine 5 , 16 , 17 , 31 , 32 , 33 , 34 , 35 , 36 , 37 , 38 , 39 , 40 , 41 , 42 , 43 , 44 , 45 , 46 , 47 , 48 , 49 , 50 , 51 , 52 , 53 , 54 , 55 , 56 , 57 , 58 , 59 , 60 , 61 , 62 , 63 , 64 , 65 , 66 , 67 , 68 , 69 , 70 , 71 , 72 , 73 , 74 , 75 , 76 observational studies assessed the diagnostic test accuracy of plasma biomarkers of interest for determining AD pathology in patients with cognitive impairment to inform recommendations. Across these studies, 31 different BBM tests were evaluated in our systematic review and are summarized in Table 3 below:TABLE 3List of assay/analyte combinations studied in the systematic review.AnalyteAssayBrandAβ42/40Immunoprecipitation‐mass spectrometry (IP‐MS) WashU Amyloid MSTM, Shimadzu PrecivityTM, C2N Diagnostics University of Gothenburg (UGOT) High‐performance liquid chromatography‐differential mobility spectrometry‐tandem mass spectrometryAraclon BiotechImmunoassay Simoa, Quanterix 4plexE Simoa, Quanterix single plexes Simoa, Quanterix Neuro 3‐plex A kit LumipulseTM, Fujirebio ElecsysTM, Roche HISCL, Sysmex p‐tau181Immunoassay Lilly assay, Meso Scale Discovery (MSD) S‐PLEX, MSD Simoa, Quanterix p‐tau‐181 Advantage Kit Simoa, Quanterix 4plexE Simoa, Quanterix UGOT LumipulseTM, Fujirebio Simoa, ADx Neurosciences Elecsys, Roche p‐tau231ImmunoassaySimoa, Quanterix UGOTp‐tau217IP‐MS WashU IP‐MS PrecivityTM, C2N Diagnostics Immunoassay Lilly assay, MSD S‐PLEX, MSD Simoa, Quanterix Janssen Simoa, ALZpath Elecsys prototype, Roche (N‐terminal)* Elecsys prototype, Roche (mid‐domain)* LumipulseTM, Fujirebio %p‐tau217IP‐MS WashU PrecivityTM, C2N Diagnostics *Discontinued. Not to be confused with other Roche p‐tau217 assays, which have not been included in the systematic review.John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.Eighty‐four studies that would have otherwise met eligibility criteria were ultimately excluded due to cognitively impaired and unimpaired populations being analyzed together, such that we were unable to separate data on only cognitively impaired individuals.Demographic data reported in primary studies were occasionally reflective of combined populations (i.e., instances where test accuracy data was reported according to cognitive status but demographic data was not). The mean sample size across studies was 560 participants (range: 70 to 2244). Mean age across studies ranged from 62.6 to 85.9 years, and the percentage of males ranged from 33.8% to 60%. Across the 32 studies that evaluated and reported apolipoprotein E (APOE) ε4 genotyping, carriers ranged from 27.1% to 56.2% of the population. 4DISCUSSION4.1Clinical implicationsGuidelines provide a framework for clinicians to make decisions based on evidence, which reduces variability and promotes standardization of care. Laboratory directors can take advantage of this guideline when selecting tests based on standard validation results that align with the needs of the clinicians. Additionally, guidelines can help payers with evaluation of medical necessity to establish reimbursement policies. Our recommendations do not account for proprietary business decisions, such as a company's intent to pursue regulatory approval for a research‐use‐only (RUO) assay.The medical literature regarding BBMs is rapidly evolving, and many different biomarkers and assays are in different stages of development. Assays for the same biomarker frequently use different methods, resulting in varying performance characteristics, and therefore must be evaluated as separate tests. Even for tests that are already clinically available, only a handful of peer‐reviewed published studies met our inclusion criteria. As a result, the existing evidence base is early and somewhat fragile, with the evidence for all tests rated as either “low” or “very low” certainty. When certainty is poor, it is possible that a future study could sway the pooled point estimates to a degree that would impact whether it meets the panel's recommended thresholds for acceptable diagnostic test accuracy. The panel considered the implications of declining to issue a recommendation for any test at this time, deferring until such time that more data emerge and confidence improves. Ultimately, we decided that patients would benefit from a set of “conditional recommendations with low certainty” with an accompanying systematic review of the most accurate and promising tests in the current field. Without this resource, providers may either select BBMs that are less promising than other available BBM options or refer patients for more invasive and expensive testing, when our expert opinion, based on the evidence reviewed here, is that harm could be reduced by the thoughtful use of BBMs in many instances.Most studies informing the associated systematic review used single‐batch plasma analyses, which do not reflect real‐world clinical settings where samples are processed on a rolling basis, for example, daily or weekly. In clinical practice, even small assay imprecision and bias can affect interpretation, particularly when applying fixed diagnostic cutoffs. Therefore, clinical laboratories need to evaluate and monitor the coefficient of variation (CV) of biomarker assays to ensure consistent performance and help minimize the risk of misclassification due to analytical variability. This is especially important for biomarkers with small fold changes between AD pathology‐positive and ‐negative individuals, such as Aβ42/40, which are more susceptible to assay imprecision in routine use. Recommendations for such biomarkers should therefore be interpreted with extra caution, since the systematic review did not account for such aspects.At the time of our analysis, the vast majority of peer‐reviewed evidence for individual BBMs presented Sn and Sp based on a single cut‐point. However, because many plasma tests fall short of the accuracy required to confidently rule in or rule out the presence of brain amyloid with a single cut‐point, the field is rapidly moving toward alternate testing paradigms. One promising paradigm is the two‐cutoff approach, where values below a certain cut‐point rule out brain amyloid and values above a certain cut‐point rule in brain amyloid, while values in the middle require further testing with PET imaging or CSF AD biomarkers. The panel will consider this approach in future guideline updates as additional evidence emerges, with careful consideration of the evidence regarding the size of the indeterminate zone. As other groups have noted, a poorly performing assay could create a very large indeterminate zone using two cutoffs that achieve prespecified Sn or Sp targets. 15 To meet the practical needs of clinical users implementing the recommendations found in this guideline, the Alzheimer's Association is also co‐creating distilled and easy‐to‐use clinical tools. These tools will be made available on a dedicated webpage in the future, as they are currently under development.4.2Generalizability of recommendationsIt is important to note that currently, there is a lack of widespread accessibility and reimbursement for many BBM tests, underscoring the need for the development of reimbursement frameworks that enable patients to benefit from emerging diagnostic technologies. The panel urges all collaborative parties to work actively toward ensuring equitable access to BBMs globally, as without deliberate efforts, this promising advancement could paradoxically widen existing disparities among countries, socioeconomic groups, and other vulnerable populations.4.3Research needsEighty‐four studies were excluded from the evidence base as they combined cognitively impaired and unimpaired individuals, limiting interpretation for the target population. Additionally, some studies did not provide sufficient diagnostic accuracy data (e.g., TP, TN, FP, and FN) to be included in quantitative analyses. These limitations highlight gaps in the current literature and underscore the need for standardized reporting and stratified analyses in future research.In addition to providing data on populations separated by cognitive status (cognitively impaired vs. unimpaired), we encourage researchers and industry partners to publish detailed and comprehensive data from their studies, including number of TP, TN, FP, FN, cutoff values used and method for determining cutoff (e.g., Youden's index or fixed Sn or Sp), data for multiple cutoffs (if applicable), detailed ROC curves, and methodological details about the conduct of the studies that inform their quality and risk of bias (e.g., random or consecutive sampling; BBM test results interpreted without knowledge of the results of the reference standard). 78 While prices for some commercially available BBM tests have been reported, further research is needed to evaluate their relative cost and cost‐effectiveness in various settings. The cost burden of BBM testing can vary by perspective, that is, healthcare systems or payers may face different relative costs than patients, depending on insurance coverage policies. Additionally, indirect costs, such as those related to diagnostic delays or additional testing triggered by BBM results, remain poorly understood. Evidence comparing the cost‐effectiveness across BBM tests is severely limited. To address these gaps and inform healthcare policy and clinical implementation decisions, formal modeling analyses are needed to project the long‐term economic and clinical consequences of BBM testing strategies, including potential downstream costs and savings.4.4Strengths and limitationsThis CPG is grounded in a systematic review of the peer‐reviewed literature and developed using the GRADE approach. The use of GRADE ensures a transparent, structured, and evidence‐based process for evaluating the certainty of evidence and formulating recommendations. This methodology strengthens the credibility and reproducibility of the guideline and allows for explicit linkage between evidence and recommendations. The panel acknowledges the inherent limitations in the published literature available to inform these recommendations and has made efforts to transparently describe where data gaps or uncertainties remain.In contrast, regulatory submissions are typically informed by data provided by industry sponsors and submitted to regulatory agencies in the context of product approval or licensure. These data, while often robust, are generally not peer‐reviewed or publicly available at the time of regulatory decision‐making. As a result, some tests that may have received regulatory approval or clearance at the time of this publication may not have been included in the systematic review or the panel's EtD process required for this guideline if peer‐reviewed data were not available or accessible.To enhance the clinical relevance and applicability of the guideline, the panel was intentionally multidisciplinary and diverse in composition. It included experts from a broad range of specialties (e.g., neurology, geriatrics, nursing), as well as methodologists with expertise in guideline development and evidence synthesis. Panelists represented a variety of geographic regions, countries, gender, and years of clinical experience to promote inclusive perspectives and reduce potential biases. This diversity enriched the deliberative process and ensured that the recommendations are applicable across a wide range of clinical contexts and patient populations.The panel acknowledged that the prevalence of brain amyloid in people with cognitive impairment has varied across populations where it has been studied, and there are many other clinical populations where amyloid testing with gold standard tests (PET or lumbar puncture or post mortem pathology) has been quite limited. Additionally, a given patient's pretest probability for AD will vary according to clinical presentation and known risk factors. 26 At this stage, the panel has only considered individual biomarkers (including ratios that use a reference peptide as the denominator) rather than combinations of multiple biomarkers. The panel deliberately chose to focus on individual biomarkers initially to evaluate combinations in subsequent phases. The panel is aware that combinations of biomarkers, such as the p‐tau217/Aβ42 ratio or a fixed combination of Aβ42/Aβ40 and a p‐tau217 ratio, are being commercialized and provided to clinicians.Because new BBM tests are continually becoming available to clinicians, the panel decided not to limit eligibility criteria to tests that were commercially available at the time of this review. As a result, the evidence base includes tests that may currently be commercially and not commercially available, including those that are clinically available, or for research use only.Lastly, several studies have been published since our latest literature search update in November 2024. These newer studies were not included in the current analysis but will be considered for inclusion in future iterations of this guideline as part of ongoing efforts to ensure recommendations reflect the most up‐to‐date evidence. 4.1Clinical implicationsGuidelines provide a framework for clinicians to make decisions based on evidence, which reduces variability and promotes standardization of care. Laboratory directors can take advantage of this guideline when selecting tests based on standard validation results that align with the needs of the clinicians. Additionally, guidelines can help payers with evaluation of medical necessity to establish reimbursement policies. Our recommendations do not account for proprietary business decisions, such as a company's intent to pursue regulatory approval for a research‐use‐only (RUO) assay.The medical literature regarding BBMs is rapidly evolving, and many different biomarkers and assays are in different stages of development. Assays for the same biomarker frequently use different methods, resulting in varying performance characteristics, and therefore must be evaluated as separate tests. Even for tests that are already clinically available, only a handful of peer‐reviewed published studies met our inclusion criteria. As a result, the existing evidence base is early and somewhat fragile, with the evidence for all tests rated as either “low” or “very low” certainty. When certainty is poor, it is possible that a future study could sway the pooled point estimates to a degree that would impact whether it meets the panel's recommended thresholds for acceptable diagnostic test accuracy. The panel considered the implications of declining to issue a recommendation for any test at this time, deferring until such time that more data emerge and confidence improves. Ultimately, we decided that patients would benefit from a set of “conditional recommendations with low certainty” with an accompanying systematic review of the most accurate and promising tests in the current field. Without this resource, providers may either select BBMs that are less promising than other available BBM options or refer patients for more invasive and expensive testing, when our expert opinion, based on the evidence reviewed here, is that harm could be reduced by the thoughtful use of BBMs in many instances.Most studies informing the associated systematic review used single‐batch plasma analyses, which do not reflect real‐world clinical settings where samples are processed on a rolling basis, for example, daily or weekly. In clinical practice, even small assay imprecision and bias can affect interpretation, particularly when applying fixed diagnostic cutoffs. Therefore, clinical laboratories need to evaluate and monitor the coefficient of variation (CV) of biomarker assays to ensure consistent performance and help minimize the risk of misclassification due to analytical variability. This is especially important for biomarkers with small fold changes between AD pathology‐positive and ‐negative individuals, such as Aβ42/40, which are more susceptible to assay imprecision in routine use. Recommendations for such biomarkers should therefore be interpreted with extra caution, since the systematic review did not account for such aspects.At the time of our analysis, the vast majority of peer‐reviewed evidence for individual BBMs presented Sn and Sp based on a single cut‐point. However, because many plasma tests fall short of the accuracy required to confidently rule in or rule out the presence of brain amyloid with a single cut‐point, the field is rapidly moving toward alternate testing paradigms. One promising paradigm is the two‐cutoff approach, where values below a certain cut‐point rule out brain amyloid and values above a certain cut‐point rule in brain amyloid, while values in the middle require further testing with PET imaging or CSF AD biomarkers. The panel will consider this approach in future guideline updates as additional evidence emerges, with careful consideration of the evidence regarding the size of the indeterminate zone. As other groups have noted, a poorly performing assay could create a very large indeterminate zone using two cutoffs that achieve prespecified Sn or Sp targets. 15 To meet the practical needs of clinical users implementing the recommendations found in this guideline, the Alzheimer's Association is also co‐creating distilled and easy‐to‐use clinical tools. These tools will be made available on a dedicated webpage in the future, as they are currently under development. 5CONCLUSIONThe key recommendations in this CPG are that for the detection of amyloid pathology in patients with objective cognitive impairment presenting to specialized care settings: (1) BBM tests with ≥90% sensitivity and ≥ 75% specificity can be used as a triaging test and (2) BBM tests with ≥90% sensitivity and specificity can serve as a substitute for amyloid PET imaging or CSF AD biomarker testing.The panel cautions users of this guideline that there is significant variability in diagnostic test accuracy, and many commercially available BBM tests do not meet these thresholds, especially using a single cutoff. Additionally, these tests do not serve as a substitute for comprehensive clinical evaluation by a healthcare professional and should be used only as part of a full diagnostic workup of patients with cognitive impairment presenting to specialized care settings, and with careful consideration of pretest probability of AD pathology.