4. DiscussionAlthough HBV prevalence has declined in many countries over the last few decades, hepatitis B remains a substantial public health problem and economic burden . Costs for universal health coverage caused by viral hepatitis infections amount to an estimated USD 6 billion per year . The substantial global burden of HBV infections led to the approval of the first global health strategy on viral hepatitis by the World Health Organization (WHO) in 2016. This strategy includes the goal of eliminating viral hepatitis as a major public health threat by 2030 . As a preventive measure, vaccination represents the most cost-efficient tool to reduce the high morbidity and mortality rates of HBV infections since current therapies do not cure the infection. However, the standard hepatitis B vaccine fails to produce a protective immune response in 5% of the general population, with an increasing likelihood of non-response in individuals with chronic conditions and older age . Besides this human immunology problem, there are additional challenges that have to be overcome to increase HBV vaccination coverage, including economic and political circumstances in many low- and middle-income countries .In Kyrgyzstan, the monitoring of viral hepatitis prevention remains suboptimal, and data about HBV vaccine responsiveness are lacking. To date, no study exists analyzing the immune responses following vaccination against HBV in Kyrgyzstan. According to previous HBV vaccination studies from other countries, the conventional vaccination schedule (0-1-6 months) induces seroconversion/seroprotection rates of >89% in healthy adults . In contrast, our study showed that only 74% of all participants became seroprotective after receiving the full vaccination series. The observed differences compared to other studies are likely explained by the unusually (and unplanned) long time interval between the third dose and the blood draw for the measurement of post-vaccination titers, but differences in study populations (i.e., different median ages or the presence of chronic diseases) and commercial vaccine products may also contribute. It has been reported that age has an impact on immunological responses to HBV vaccines . Age-related changes in the immune system, including immune senescence and inflammaging, can lead to impaired immunity in older adults, thereby reducing the prophylactic efficacy of vaccinations as compared to younger individuals . In line with this, our study demonstrated that vaccine non-responders were more common among participants ≥ 40 years old, and immunologic processes associated with immune senescence are likely also responsible for the fact that antibody titers correlated negatively with age in the 0-1-3 scheme.Aiming at a cost-efficient vaccination schedule, previous studies have analyzed accelerated vaccination schedules for HBV vaccines as compared to the standard schedule (0-1-6-month) to provide rapid seroprotection, which might also influence compliance among adults to get vaccinated . It has been reported that shorter intervals (<4 months) between the second and third vaccine dose induce a relatively efficient seroresponse (64–92% of participants achieving protective titers; 64% in our study) and may not be inferior to longer intervals . However, the majority of studies have demonstrated that longer intervals (≥4 months) result in even higher seroconversion rates, as well as anti-HBsAg GMTs, and longer intervals are, therefore, recommended. In accordance with these reports, our study revealed higher vaccine-induced seroprotective immune responses for the 0-1-6-month schedule as compared to the 0-1-3-month schedule after completing the full vaccination series. This can be explained, at least in part, by a putative optimal interval to match the boost with the contraction phase of the germinal center . The kinetics of germinal center contraction have been studied in needle aspirations of human lymph nodes after SARS-CoV-2 vaccination (reviewed in ). In analogy to findings in these SARS-CoV-2 studies, it is tempting to speculate that a better match with the germinal center contraction in the 0-1-6 scheme results in the improved recruitment of memory B cells that re-encounter the antigen and re-enter the GC. This would lead to improved hypersomatic mutation and affinity maturation, which would improve the quality of plasmablasts and memory B cells. This would result not only in higher titers but also in a better quality of antibodies in terms of affinity, avidity, and neutralization capacity. Applied to our study, this model rests on the assumption that germinal center contraction after HBsAg vaccination follows different kinetics with advancing age. Future studies should be directed at testing this hypothesis. It is also generally assumed that higher anti-HBsAg levels after the primary vaccination series result in longer-lasting vaccine protection . In this context, previous studies have demonstrated that women develop higher antibody levels after vaccination against HBV than men and that vaccine non-responsiveness is more likely among males . In our study, no sex-specific differences were observed in vaccine-induced antibody responses and seroprotection rates, irrespective of age. However, the correlation analysis between age and sex with the anti-HBsAg titers after the third vaccination within the 0-1-3-month schedule revealed a negative correlation of increasing age with the antibody titers among male adults. Therefore, it is recommended to use a longer schedule for future vaccination strategies, in particular for older men.However, the present study holds some limitations. We did not evaluate other modifiable risk factors (e.g., psychosocial factors such as beliefs and attitudes regarding vaccines, socioeconomic factors such as occupation status, and education level) for noncompliance with the third vaccine dose. The size of the cohort was relatively small, which also led to unequally distributed age and sex subgroups. Furthermore, information about biomedically important parameters, such as smoking, body mass index, or co-morbidities, was not assessed in this study. These parameters might influence outcomes in terms of responsiveness to vaccination, as well as weaken conclusions on putative differences between the two subcohorts in case of an uneven distribution . Therefore, larger and more in-depth characterized cohorts are needed to confirm our findings. It would also be important to identify incentive strategies to improve participants’ compliance with a timely return for the blood draw after the third vaccine dose.In conclusion, the results of this regional study in Kyrgyzstan suggest that the conventional 0-1-6-month vaccination schedule in adults provides better seroprotection than the accelerated 0-1-3-month schedule, particularly for older individuals, while compliance with presenting for the third vaccine dose is superior in the 0-1-3-month schedule.To overcome this bottleneck, improved vaccination strategies, including incentives to improve return rates for the third vaccine dose, specifically tailored for the elderly and the local psycho-socio-economic environment, are urgently needed.