DiscussionA first-in-human clinical trial demonstrated that an adult population vaccinated with ProC6C-AlOH/Matrix-M elicited high levels of transmission blocking antibodies measured in the SMFA at D70.18 However, there was no information on the longevity of these functional antibodies in the initial analysis.Here we report on the TRA elicited by ProC6C-AlOH/Matrix-M through pairwise analysis of functional antibodies at Days 70 (2-weeks post-third vaccination) and 180 (4-months post-third vaccination). We found that ProC6C-AlOH/Matrix-M delivered through three doses, each four weeks apart, resulted in peak antibodies at D70, with functional TB antibodies waning over time. At D70, 18/20 individuals had significant TRA in the SMFA, while only 7 of these maintained significant TRA at D180. Longevity of antibody titers is key to an effective malaria vaccine, and these results indicate the ProC6C-AlOH/Matrix-M vaccine regimen should be altered from the current regimen in future trials to evaluate the potential to improve antibody durability. Future clinical development of ProC6C-AlOH/Matrix-M could therefore consider an altered primary immunization regimen (e.g. 0,1,6 months) to extend antibody longevity33 or an additional booster dose such as established for the hepatitis B vaccine.34In attempt to quantitate antibodies against epitope I in the Pfs48/45-6C domain we used a competition assay with mAb TB31F. Using ROC analysis, we found that levels of anti-Pfs48/45-6C and anti-epitope I antibodies were excellent predictors of significant TRA with thresholds of 8.7 and 5.5 µg/ml, respectively. As expected, these thresholds for a polyclonal antibody response are higher than the 2.1 μg/mL (95%CI 1.9–2.3) concentration of the mAb TB31F which was required for 80% TRA in the recent phase I study of TB31F.25 Identifying an immune biomarker which predicts functional activity (TRA) would allow simple, high-volume comparisons between immunization regimens and vaccine doses. Overall, the predictive analysis supports previous clinical results with TB31F and suggests that the immune biomarkers identified here may be useful in future ProC6C vaccine development either individually or in combination.As expected, we found that levels of anti-Pfs48/45-6C and anti-epitope I IgG were highly correlated. However, there were some samples with relatively high levels of Pfs48/45-6C IgG and low levels of epitope I IgG suggesting that ProC6C elicited antibodies against other Epitopes in the Pfs48/45-6C region. The finding that human anti-Pfs48/45-6C antibodies might be targeting multiple epitopes is in line with resent data published on a series of human mAbs against Pfs48/45.35 Using X-ray crystallography and competition assays with TB31F these authors identified at least two distinct epitope regions within the Pfs48/45-6C domain, one of which is different from epitope I. Whether this epitope domain is recognized by antibodies generated by ProC6C-AlOH/Matrix-M remains to be investigated. Similar, antibody avidity may play a role in competition of Pfs48/45-6C antibodies including to epitope I and TB31F and therefore antibody avidity should be evaluated in future studies.In addition to the Pfs48/45-6C domain, ProC6C also contains the Pfs230-Pro domain in the N-terminal end of the fusion protein. Pfs230 is a large protein containing multiple cysteine-rich domains and an unstructured domain (Pro) in the N-terminal region.36 The detailed investigation of Pfs230 domains for functional antibodies demonstrated that the N-terminal Pro domain was sufficient to elicit complement-dependent TB activity in the SMFA.37,38 The results presented here demonstrated that ProC6C-AlOH/Matrix-M elicited high levels of antibodies against the Pfs230-Pro domain. Although the Pfs230-Pro titers were high, there was no effect of complement suggesting that anti-Pfs48/45 antibodies are the main contributor to the functional activity in this ex vivo assay.Antibodies against the sexual stages of the parasite aims to block the male/female fertilization in the mosquito midgut, or the development of the ookinete thereby preventing transmission from one person to another. While, such antibodies do not offer the vaccinated individual personal protection, reducing malaria transmission is considered a priority because the majority of malaria cases in endemic areas are asymptomatic and therefore relatively unaffected by malaria control interventions that aim to reduce the disease burden. Whereas the anti-infection vaccines (AIV), RTS,S/AS01 and R21/Matrix-M provide personal protection, a multi-stage vaccine such as ProC6C which combine anti-infection and TB activities may transform the impact of vaccination from protection of vulnerable groups to a reduction of disease burden in the population by reducing the incidence of P. falciparum infection in both human and mosquito populations. The present analysis reported here, excluded the anti-infection (CSP based antibody responses) as they were previously reported for ProC6C-AlOH/Matrix-M21 including D70 and D180 anti-CSP IgG.Current and planned vaccination campaigns with RTS,S/AS01 and R21/Matrix-M are targeting children below 5 years of age.39,40 Considering the importance of asymptomatic school-aged children (5–15 years) in malaria transmission,41,42 the inclusion of a TBV in a multi-stage vaccine could form a rationale for including older children in future malaria vaccination studies. The TBV component(s) of a multi-stage vaccine is further important as they may block selection for AIV escape mutants as well reduce the spread of resistant parasites which may compromise effective treatment of clinical malaria in endemic countries.43In summary we have shown that ProC6C-AlOH/Matrix-M elicits TRA and TB antibodies which wane over time through four-months post last dose. Thus, a new vaccination schedule using a delayed fractional dose should be considered in future trials of ProC6C-AlOH/Matrix-M to induce high levels of functional antibodies lasting through six-month post-vaccination, especially during age-de-escalation.Strengths and limitationsThe ProC6C multi-stage malaria vaccine immunogen is a complex recombinant protein encompassing three malaria related proteins (Pfs230, CSP, and Pfs48/45). The complexity of three antigens and two vaccine objectives (transmission-blocking and anti-infection) result in a complicated dataset to analyze. Due to the rapid clinical development (two Phase 1 clinical trials in two endemic populations) and a current enrolled Phase 2 trial, a complex dataset has been generated. The authors have undertaken the approach of first demonstrating safety, tolerability, and immunogenicity to the vaccine immunogen (ProC6C). Subsequent analysis has resulted in the authors reporting the anti-infection and transmission-blocking properties separately along with durability of the antibodies generated. Future analysis should evaluate transmission-blocking and anti-infection properties to determine any correlation of the two vaccine-induced approaches. Additionally, as ProC6C has been explored in two populations (Burkina Faso and Mali), the impact of the endemic population, seasonality of malaria, and preexisting immunity should be further explored especially to evaluate any confounding factors (and prognostic) factors. Additionally, the current study was powered for safety, tolerability and immunogenicity and future studies should assess the impact of confounding and prognostic factors to assure appropriate sample size.Due to the multi-stage malaria disruption nature of ProC6C, the vaccine is designed to be administered to both young, school-age children, and village populations (adults). Future trials will have to carefully evaluate the impact of age on vaccine-induced antibody magnitude and durability and explore the interrelationship of transmission-blocking (community) on direct personal protection.The functional activity (TRA) as measured in the SMFA is both a labor intensive and variable assay, however it is a standardized assessment of transmission-reducing activity of malaria candidates. The physiological concentration tested here (15 mg/mL) is the average IgG concentration of Africa American Adults,26 but this concentration may be 2–3 fold higher than that observed in developed countries.44 Therefore the TRA observed at 15 mg/mL IgG may not be inferred or applicable to the exact IgG concentration required for differing populations, including younger or school-age children. Nevertheless, the SMFA allows a standardized ex vivo assessment of TBVs.A strength of ProC6C is that it confers transmission-blocking activity and anti-infection activity in a single vaccine; while other TBVs are being explored to be administered in conjunction with RTS,S/AS01 or R21/Matrix-M. In addition, ProC6C targets novel TBV proteins (Pfs48/45) and novel CSP epitopes (major and minor repeats). Therefore, ProC6C has the ability to stand alone as a single-multi-stage vaccine or may even be explored to improve and focus CSP immune responses of other current CSP-based vaccines such as RTS,S/AS01 and R21/Matrix-M.Future directionsComprehensive analysis of the Phase 1 trial of ProC6C-AlOH/Matrix-M has previously shown that the multi-stage malaria vaccine is as follows: 1) safe and immunogenic,18 2) Elicits transmission blocking activity at D70,18 and elicits liver invasion inhibition through CSP-based antibodies.21 Exploratory endpoints analyzed here, indicated a decrease in TB antibody titer (Pfs48/45 and Pfs230) beyond day 140 (3 months post last dose of the 0, 1, 2 month regimen). Additionally, a small Phase 2 Controlled Human Malaria Infection (CHMI) study is currently ongoing (PACTR202404598604620) to also determine the vaccine efficacy (CSP-based antibodies) at approximately 3-months post last dose of the 0, 1, 2 month regimen. These early phase clinical results taken together, will support during age-escalation, in the pediatric population, whether altered immunization regimens to extend antibody longevity should be explored. Altering the prior trial design (0,1,2 month vaccine regimen) to a delayed third vaccination (0,1,6 months) has proven highlight successfully for the P. falciparum RH5 vaccine candidate.45,46 Further, RH5 induced a 10-fold higher vaccine specific response in infants (6–11 months) compared to UK adults.47Further, the initial ROC analysis of anti-Pfs48/45 markers (Pfs48/45-6C and epitope I) indicate circulating biomarkers of transmission-reducing activity following vaccination with ProC6C-AlOH/Matrix-M can be identified. These curves and thresholds should be updated as additional trials are conducted, with the objective of finding surrogate circulation biomarkers to replace the labor intensive and variable ex vivo SMFA. Similarly, following further clinical studies of ProC6C-AlOH/Matrix-M for anti-infection (anti-CSP based antibody responses), surrogate biomarkers representative of the anti-CSP response may be correlated to clinical outcomes, adding value to additional biomarkers following vaccination of ProC6C-AlOH/Matrix-M which may serve to measure and monitor the vaccines functionality and also antibody longevity.Taken together, these results suggest that age-de-escalation and a delayed third dose of ProC6C-AlOH/Matrix-M can significantly increase the magnitude and durability of specific antibodies.