DiscussionIn this work, we followed a completely unbiased approach to discover genomics, transcriptomics and clinical features associated with CPI response and survival across patients with cancer. We aimed to answer how many and which aspects of the tumor, its microenvironment and the host influence the response to CPIs across patients (that is, latent factors), in an effort to provide a framework of reference to existing copious reports of biomarkers. First, through univariate logistic and Cox regressions, we identified a few hundred features that are significantly associated with CPI response and/or survival. Five latent factors emerge when these significant features are clustered based on their pairwise correlation. These represent mutually independent aspects of the tumor, its microenvironment and the host that influence the response of a patient to CPI and their hazard after the treatment.Although the fact that some genomics and transcriptomics features may represent the same aspect of tumors, their microenvironment or the host had been reported before, here we show that an array of different, highly intercorrelated features (for example, expression of genes related to T cell function) actually represent different measurements of the same latent factor. This is particularly striking in the case of TMB: the mutation rate of hundreds of genes (including cancer driver genes) appears to be highly correlated with TMB, suggesting that the association of mutations in a given gene with CPI response rather than an independent biomarker is just an alternative proxy measurement of TMB. Although the mutation status of some genes may still be bona fide biomarkers of CPI response, independently of TMB, any analysis to identify them should account for the confounding factor of their correlation with TMB. We also demonstrate that the associations of the latent factors with CPI response and survival are observed across different tumor types, and we validated them across six independent cohorts of patients. Most of the associations discovered in the HMF-CPI cohort were corroborated across these independent cohorts, despite differences in sample collection and processing procedures and profiling methods between these cohorts and the HMF-CPI. This indicates that these latent factors are mostly universally associated with CPI response and survival. They may thus be potentially used in the future within the clinical practice, despite the heterogeneity of sample processing and tumor profiling approaches used. The variability observed across tumors of different origins in more than one cohort (for example, the smaller association of effective T cell infiltration with the response of lung tumors) may point to findings that could be pursued further. To our knowledge, this constitutes the most extensive exploration, to date, of the biomarkers of CPI response and survival across cohorts with tumors from different organs.Importantly, no features other than these five latent factors were significantly associated with CPI response or survival. That is, virtually all significant features cluster within one of them. However, some relevant features may still lay below the statistical power of the HMF-CPI cohort or appear significantly associated with CPI response or survival in only one tumor type. This is particularly important for features that may be relevant for a fraction of patients, such as mechanisms of immune escape (for example, B2M deletion, an event that we observe as significant across melanomas but not other tumors in the HMF-CPI cohort; see Supplementary Note 1)8,22,24,36. Other examples of such features relevant for specific groups of patients may include common polymorphisms that affect the immune response37 and the heterozygosity at HLA loci38. Particularities of the tumor types not represented in the HMF-CPI cohort are, of course, also absent from our current catalog of proxy biomarkers. These will be discovered when larger CPI cohorts are analyzed; it is not inconceivable that even more latent factors will become apparent then. Our discovery of latent factors is also limited by the profiling technologies used, which rely on deconvolution of the immune infiltrate based on bulk RNA-seq data. More detailed studies of this infiltrate—based on fine mapping of immune populations and their interactions with other cells in the microenvironment—will contribute in the future to refine the landscape of biomarkers of CPI response and survival.A test of the application of multivariate models combining the five latent factors produced a stratification of the patients in the HMF-CPI cohort based on their predicted response probabilities that discriminates better between responders and non-responders than the threshold of TMB frequently used in the clinic. This could be regarded as a proof-of-principle for application of the five latent factors to clinical practice. Being able to identify patients with a very low probability of response would be relevant to spare them the potential side effects of the therapy7. Additionally, it may aid in reducing the financial burden on healthcare providers39. There is also the possibility—illustrated through the analyses described above—to use such multivariate models to identify patients with tumors that are not usually considered suitable candidates for CPI who have a high probability to respond. In the future, when these types of models can be used in support of clinical decision-making, this could potentially contribute to expanding the therapeutic options for patients suffering from these malignancies.In summary, we envision that the results of this work can provide a frame of reference to the research of biomarkers of CPI response and survival, resulting in the classification of all identified significant features falling into one of these five latent factors, or a completely independent one. Reporting summaryFurther information on research design is available in the Nature Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article.