1INTRODUCTIONAlzheimer's disease (AD) is the leading cause of dementia, contributing to an estimated 60% to 80% of all dementias. According to the Alzheimer's Association Facts & Figures report, approximately 7.2 million Americans are living with AD dementia in 2025. This number is projected to double by 2060, highlighting a growing public health crisis as the population ages. 1 Pathologically, AD is defined by the accumulation of extracellular cortical plaques composed of amyloid beta (Aβ) fibrils and intracellular neurofibrillary tangles containing abnormal hyperphosphorylated tau protein. 2 These pathologies manifest many years or even decades before the onset of clinical symptoms, marking a prolonged preclinical phase during which progressive brain damage occurs. 3 RESEARCH IN CONTEXT Systematic review: The Alzheimer's Association has recently launched an initiative to develop evidence‐based clinical practice guidelines using the Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development, and Evaluation (GRADE) approach, aiming to apply a rigorous and transparent methodology to the development of guidelines for clinicians. In the context of Diagnostic Test Accuracy, GRADE emphasizes the use of systematic reviews to inform the diagnostic accuracy of emerging tools, such as blood‐based biomarkers, and their impact on outcomes that matter most to patients. This comprehensive evidence synthesis serves as the foundation for actionable, evidence‐based recommendations for clinicians, policy‐makers, patients, and caregivers as part of a shared decision‐making model to improve dementia diagnosis, treatment, and care. These translational research efforts are designed with the understanding that routine updates will be essential to ensure the guidelines remain current and relevant. Interpretation: The guidelines translate complex scientific data, including, but not limited to, findings from systematic reviews, into clear, actionable recommendations for clinicians across specialties, while also informing decision‐making at the policy level. The blood‐based biomarker guideline presented in this manuscript specifically provides guidance on whether blood tests for Alzheimer's disease should be used in specialized care settings as part of a comprehensive diagnostic process by providers with training and experience in the diagnosis of memory disorders. Designed to support real‐world clinical decision‐making, these recommendations are dynamic and evolve alongside the advancing evidence base. Future directions: The Alzheimer's Association will continue to expand clinical topics for guideline development and associated methodological approaches for translating scientific evidence informing the Association's guideline recommendations. Guidelines will be updated as the peer‐reviewed evidence base evolves, with accompanying tools, training, and resources to support effective clinical adoption. Emerging research priorities also include collaborative approaches to conducting systematic reviews and keeping them up‐to‐date, and building and fostering an evidence ecosystem prioritizing data‐sharing to minimize research waste. For decades, the options for ante mortem detection of AD pathology have been limited to tests that are either expensive, such as positron emission tomography (PET), or invasive but safe when properly performed, such as cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) ‐based biomarker analysis. 4 , 5 Furthermore, these tools remain out of reach to most healthcare providers, even in many specialized clinical settings. Despite these barriers, there are multiple reasons why patients and clinicians seek in vivo confirmation of AD pathology. A key driver is higher diagnostic accuracy, since AD is often misdiagnosed without biomarkers, even in specialist settings. 6 Furthermore, identifying the presence or absence of AD pathology can help narrow the etiology of cognitive impairment, guide appropriate care strategies, and provide valuable prognostic information for patients and their families. 7 , 8 The recent regulatory approvals of new amyloid targeting therapies for AD, which require biomarker confirmation of amyloid pathology to determine treatment eligibility, further highlights the need. 9 , 10 , 11 , 12 , 13 As these therapies are receiving regulatory approval and being marketed in different parts of the world, the demand for biomarker‐based diagnostics to accurately identify eligible patients, enable early intervention, and ascertain when treatment is likely to be most effective, is expected to rise substantially. 14 , 15 In recent years, multiple blood‐based biomarkers (BBMs) have become available as promising and accessible alternatives for detecting AD pathology. 14 Compared to PET and CSF testing, BBMs offer several advantages: they are less costly, more accessible, and more acceptable to patients. These attributes position BBMs as promising tools to address the growing diagnostic demands. 14 , 15 While several BBMs are now commercially available, diagnostic performance varies across available tests, 16 , 17 and their integration into clinical practice is still inconsistent. In 2022, the Alzheimer's Association published the field's first appropriate use recommendations for BBMs in clinical practice and clinical trials. 18 BBMs have been incorporated into the recently revised criteria for diagnosis and staging of AD by a workgroup of the Alzheimer's Association. 3 Furthermore, the Global CEO Initiative (CEOi) on AD BBM Workgroup has recently published recommendations for the minimum acceptable performance of BBM tests. 15 Despite these advances, the absence of a formal Clinical Practice Guideline (CPG) remains a critical barrier to the consistent and evidence‐based application of BBMs in real‐world settings.To address this gap, the Alzheimer's Association has convened a panel of clinical and subject‐matter experts, along with guideline methodologists with expertise in the Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development, and Evaluation (GRADE) approach. This collaborative effort has resulted in two complementary manuscripts: the present CPG, which provides formal recommendations, and a separate systematic review that presents the underlying evidence base. 19 Here we outline the evidence‐based CPG, which aims to provide recommendations to support clinicians, patients, and policy‐makers in integrating BBMs into the diagnostic workflows of AD in cognitively impaired individuals in the care of memory disorder specialists in specialized care settings.