BackgroundThis study aims to identify biomarkers for treatment response of atezolizumab plus bevacizumab (Atezo+Bev) in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). IntroductionHepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most common malignancies and a leading cause of cancer-related death worldwide . Recently, atezolizumab plus bevacizumab (Atezo+Bev) was approved as a first-line treatment for patients with unresectable HCC (uHCC). However, the efficacy of the treatment varies from case to case; in clinical trials, 30% of patients achieved an objective response, whereas 19% failed to achieve disease control . Therefore, it is desirable to develop relevant biomarkers to identify patients who are most likely to benefit from Atezo+Bev therapy.Currently, the most reliable method for forecasting efficacy is to evaluate the tumor microenvironment (TME) of the tumor tissue. For example, HCC with high CD274 and Teff signatures or with CD8-positive cell infiltration are considered to have hot TME, and Atezo + Bev are effective . However, because tumor biopsies entail the risks of dissemination and bleeding, liver cancer is one of the cancers in which tissue biopsy is relatively difficult to perform. Therefore, there is a need to discover blood biomarkers that are non-invasive and easily evaluated, and in this study, we focused on cytokines. Cytokines such as IL-6 and IL-8, which have immunomodulatory effects, are known to promote cancer growth in TME . IL-8 has been reported to be a prognostic factor in patients undergoing immune checkpoint inhibitor (ICI) treatment for malignant melanoma, lung cancer, and renal cell carcinoma [7–10], and high levels of IL-6 may be useful in predicting treatment response in HCC treated with Atezo+Bev therapy . However, high serum cytokines such as IL-6 and IL-8 are often associated with malignancies that are resistant to treatment and have a poor prognosis [11–14], and it can be difficult to determine whether levels of these cytokines reflect response to Atezo+Bev treatment or indicate progression of the underlying tumor potential. This study evaluated whether the identified markers were specific to Atezo+Bev by comparing them to patients treated with lenvatinib. Patient background characteristicsBaseline demographics for patients in the background-matched Atezo+Bev training and lenvatinib groups are shown in Supplementary Table 3. Approximately 80% of the patients were male, the median age was 73 years, and 90% of the cases were Child–Pugh class A. 60% of the patients were classified as BCLC stage intermediate. No significant differences were observed in any parameters between the Atezo+Bev training group and the lenvatinib group.