ConclusionsUsing cross-population GWAS meta-analyses, we identify novel LOAD susceptibility loci in/near LRRC4C and LHX5-AS1, both with known roles in neuronal development, as well as several novel population-unique loci. Reflecting the power of diverse ancestry in GWAS, we detect the SHARPIN locus with only 13.7% of the sample size of the NHW GWAS study (n = 409,589) in which this locus was first observed. Continued expansion into larger multi-ancestry studies will provide even more power for further elucidating the genomics of late-onset Alzheimer’s disease. DiscussionIn the largest multi-ancestry GWAS meta-analysis in AD to date, we identified two novel genome-wide cross-GSG associations near LRRC4C and LHX5-AS1, and three GSG-specific genome-wide significant loci near KIAA0825 (NHW), and GRB14 and PTPRK (HIS). Functional annotation follow-up revealed the LRRC4C variant’s potential regulatory role in enhancer regulation in tissues and cell types related to AD pathogenesis, and the involvement of the LHX5-AS1 variant in regulatory roles in immune cell types and brain regions. In silico differential expression analyses across brain tissues suggested differential expressions of LRRC4C and KIAA0825 between AD and control brains and association of LRRC4C expression with Braak stage; however, these gene expression results should be carefully interpreted since the observed effect size was relatively small. Pathway analyses implicated pathways associated with amyloid metabolism, cholesterol transport, and inflammation, consistent with previous pathway-based findings in AD.While the available AD GWAS data from non-European GSG groups continue to be dwarfed by the sample sizes of AD GWAS in European GSG subjects, our analyses demonstrate the power of multi-GSG datasets. This was exemplified by the significant association at the SHARPIN locus in our study. While the SHARPIN association was first observed in a study of 53,689 clinically diagnosed and “proxy” AD cases and 355,900 controls individuals of European/NHW ancestral genetic background (rs34173062, MAF = 0.081, OR = 1.13, P = 1.7 × 10–6) and later confirmed in much larger sample sizes , here we observed a genome-wide significant association (rs34173062, P = 1.81 × 10−9) with a much smaller sample size. While NHW participants in this study had similar MAF (0.086 here vs. 0.081) and similar effect size (OR = 1.19 here vs. 1.13), the much larger effect size in HIS participants (ORHIS = 1.37; MAFHIS = 0.057) ensured sufficient power to detect a GWS cross-GSG association in just 56,241 subjects, only 13.7% the sample size of Schwartzentruber et al. (n = 409,589) , reflecting the unique power leveraging diverse populations can provide in GWAS. A post hoc power analysis  confirmed this: For the sample size of HIS, we had Power(1 − β) = 0.89 to detect an association at P = 1.88 × 10−4 at OR = 1.37 and MAF = 0.086, whereas we would have had only Power ~ 0.23 to detect an association at the same significance level and sample size if OR = 1.19 and MAF = 0.057.Similarly to the SHARPIN locus here, the higher frequencies of risk alleles in non-NHW GSGs may explain why the novel loci identified were not observed in earlier and much larger NHW GWAS. The association of the LRRC4C variant is relatively modest in NHW (MAF = 0.168, OR = 1.11, P = 1.81 × 10–6), but the higher frequency of the risk allele in HIS (MAF = 0.206) and EAS (MAF = 0.335) boost power to detect marginal associations of similar effect size to NHW in both groups (HIS, OR = 1.13, P = 0.00761; EAS, OR = 1.14, P = 0.0597), so that the combined effect across GSGs is detectable at the GWS level. A similar effect is observed with the LHX5-AS1 locus, which is of very low frequency in NHW (MAF = 0.0007) so that a statistically significant association is not observed even with a strong protective effect (OR = 0.50, P = 0.245), but in HIS, the much higher frequency (MAF = 0.039) coupled with a similarly strong protective effect (OR = 0.44) produces a GWS association in HIS that drives the cross-GSG association. The similar size and direction of effect in NHW and HIS suggest that this locus could be detected in NHW elsewhere, but post hoc power estimates suggested a GWS association in NHW would require ~ 123,000 cases, greater than the largest number of cases in published NHW GWAS of LOAD to date (Bellenguez et al. 2022; n = 111,326).Among the novel loci identified in cross-GSG analyses, both LRRC4C and LHX5-AS1 are potential biological candidates for roles in AD. LRRC4C encodes leucin-rich repeat (LRR) containing adhesion molecules, which are key organizers of inhibitory and excitatory synapses. Mutations within the gene have been implicated in neurodevelopmental disorders, such as autism  and intellectual disability . LRRC4C variants with suggestive associations with CSF b-site APP cleaving enzyme (BACE) have been previously discovered in ADNI . Additionally, one study used LRRC4C knock-out mice in an experimental multiple sclerosis model and found a neuron-protective role for LRRC4C, concluding that the ectopic expression of LRRC4 C protected neurons from immune damage . Associated variants in the LRRC4C locus are significantly associated with sQTL for LRRC4C in GTEx brain frontal cortex, and fall in a regulatory region that are notably enhancers in neuron tissue , with transcription factor (TF) Chromatin ImmunoPrecipitation Sequencing (ChIP-Seq) experiments showing the region overlapping our index variant as being a target of Srebf1 in exocrine gland, epithelium and mammary gland tissues. Srebf1 is a transcriptional activator required for lipid homeostasis and has been identified as a proneural transcription factor in radial glia . Variants of SREBF1 influence AD risk by moderating the deleterious effect of the APOE ε4 allele .LHX5-AS1 is an antisense RNA gene, which is complementary to the mRNA LHX5 with which it hybridizes and blocks its translation into protein. LHX5 encodes LIM homeobox 5, which is essential for the regulation of precursor cell proliferation. This gene controls neuronal differentiation and migration during hippocampal development . LHX5 and LHX5-AS1 are similarly expressed in various regions of the adult central nervous system including hypothalamus, spinal cord, cerebellum, basal ganglia, and cerebellar hemisphere . Significantly associated variants for this locus fall in a regulatory region, for example, bivalent enhancers in hematopoietic multipotent progenitor cells and brain . Our specific index variant is an enhancer in blood and a transcription variant in neural progenitor cells . Variants in 12q24 have previously been associated with hippocampal volume . This novel locus is ~ 360 kb away from the recently reported locus at TPCN1 .Notably, most of the novel loci identified in GSG-specific analyses act in biologically plausible pathways. The protein encoded by Grb14 functions as a negative modulator of insulin receptor (IR) activity. Both insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes (T2D) and have been implicated in AD by a large body of epidemiological, neuropathological, and experimental studies . Brain tissue from individuals with AD show major abnormalities in insulin signaling and increased presence of disease-specific pathological lesions, neurodegeneration, and neuronal vulnerability . In structural and functional neuroimaging studies, T2D and insulin resistance are associated with white increased burden of white matter lesions, decreased hippocampal volume, regional cerebral blood flow, and oxygenation [46–50]. PTPRK encodes a member of the protein tyrosine phosphatase (PTP) family regulating a variety of cellular processes including cell growth, differentiation, mitotic cycle, and oncogenic transformation. Variants in PTPRK were recently found to be associated with reaction time in a GWAS on cognitive function in 300,486 individuals of predominantly European genetic ancestral background . KIAA0825 encodes a protein of largely unknown function; however, it is differentially expressed in AD vs. control in brain RNAseq data (see URL below).Given that KIAA0825 had not been reported in previous NHW GWAS studies, we conducted a detailed examination of this locus using summary statistics from the Bellenguez et al.  GWAS study in NHW. We investigated the region spanning from 93,655,878 to 94,274,481 on chromosome 5 revealing multiple variants with significance levels reaching P = 1.1 × 10−4. This suggests that while the KIAA0825 locus was not highlighted in earlier studies, there is preliminary evidence of its genetic relevance in the NHW population.In addressing the transferability of GWAS loci across ancestries, our data illustrate a compelling differential risk association. For instance, the CR1 locus shows genome-wide significance in NHW populations but is not associated with AD risk in other ancestries, suggesting a potential variance in genetic susceptibility or environmental interactions across populations. Similarly, the BIN1 locus, implicated in tau pathology in AD, demonstrates a strong association in NHW and nominal significance in AFA and HIS populations, yet this association is not replicated in EAS datasets. Variants such as APOE ε4 and APOE ε2, known respectively for their association with AD risk and protection, show significant associations across all ancestries; however, the effect size of APOE ε4 exhibits variation across populations. These examples support our hypothesis that, while some loci confer universal risk or protection against AD, others display a distinct GSG-specific effect. Such findings highlight the necessity for inclusive genetic research that recognizes the diversity of genetic ancestral backgrounds. This is important for advancing our understanding of AD and for the development of effective, personalized interventions.Leveraging GWAS on diverse ancestries, here we observed evidence for novel loci not seen in prior multi-ancestry or large NHW-only studies. While this study yielded several novel AD susceptibility loci, the fewer non-European GSG samples relative to European GSG samples (57.2% of participants) remains a limitation. This constrains the identification of rare variants and novel GSG-specific loci in highly admixed groups including AFA and HIS, where heterogeneity in levels of European, African, and Amerindian admixture may strongly limit statistical power. Future work planned for these data includes global and local admixture analyses to provide detailed characterization of patterns of admixture and adjust for these positional and GSG-specific background differences, as well as on-going expansion of multi-population AD data resources. Despite our use of a high filtering threshold for imputation quality (R2 > 0.8) for inclusion in this analysis, variability in the frequencies of population-specific haplotypes against which to impute variants may have contributed to undetected differences in quality for the same variant between GSGs, suggesting we may have missed some non-NHW-driven associations in this study. The limited availability of non-NHW data further constrained our ability to perform replication of our findings in diverse sample sets, and splitting our non-NHW GSGs for replication would have severely limited their power for discovery. While confirmation through functional follow-up work provides support for our discovery associations, the possibility remains that the novel loci may be potential false positive associations until independently replicated. We will pursue replication/validation of our findings as the availability of non-NHW AD datasets increases. While more non-European GSG AD GWAS are valuable for cross-GSG comparisons of AD genetic risk profiles, even modest amounts of diverse data have tremendously boosted our ability to detect novel AD susceptibility loci. ConclusionsThis study identified several novel LOAD susceptibility loci, including those in or near LRRC4 C and LHX5-AS1, which are recognized for their roles in neuronal development. The findings were achieved with considerably smaller sample sizes compared to recent large LOAD GWAS of predominantly ancestral genetic background, highlighting the efficiency and importance of including diverse genetic backgrounds in genomic research. Expanding the diversity in genetic studies will improve our understanding of genetic risk factors across different populations, ultimately leading to more effective diagnostic and therapeutic strategies for AD.