MethodsStudy design and populationA cross-sectional community-based study was conducted in the Bankeng village (4° 38,043″ N; 12° 13,003″ E), located in the Department of “Haute Sanaga”, Central Region of Cameroon, during the rainy season (May 2020) and the dry season (December 2020). The Bankeng village (about 400 inhabitants37) is located at the transition from forest to savannah on the National Road N°1 linking Yaoundé to Kousséri (Fig. 1).Figure 1Map showing the location of the Bankeng, a small Village in Central Cameroon. Map was created using QGIS software v2.18 (https://docs.qgis.org/2.18/en/docs/index.html).The locality is characterized by a classic equatorial rainfall regime with two dry seasons separated by two rainy seasons of unequal importance (from mid-March to June the long rainy season with important rainfall and from September to mid-November the short rainy season with less rainfall and more specifically from the first to the fifteenth of November when there is no more rain). The only malaria vector find in Bankeng belong to the genus of Anopheles gambiae complex, especially to An. gambiae ss (98.5%), and this vector exhibited a high level of resistance to almost all insecticides (93.9%) except to organophosphates38,39. As is the case across the country, the main control strategy used against exposure to mosquito bites is the Long-lasting insecticidal nets (LLIN) in Bankeng and the last distribution campaign which is universal coverage was taking place in 2019 during the survey period.The community had been sensitized a week earlier by community facilitators who invited them to participate in the study. After the study was presented to the community, all individuals who met the eligibility criteria and agreed to participate in the study were recruited after signing an informed consent form. For participants under the age of 21, parental or guardian consent and participant assent were obtained.To limit the selection and information bias, participants were consecutively recruited during the two seasons and participation in the study was voluntary. Eligibility for inclusion was defined as local residents who had not traveled outside the study area in the previous 3 weeks, as it is known that antibodies to the salivary peptide drop significantly in 3 weeks when exposure to Anopheles bites ceases or significantly reduces23,25. Pregnant women and individuals with severe clinical signs of malaria as defined by WHO40, were excluded.The study was approved by the National Ethics Committee for Human Health Research of Cameroon (CE N˚1840/CRERSHC/2019), and administrative authorization was obtained from the local head. Participation in the study was completely anonymous and without compensation.Entomological surveyAnopheles mosquito density and Anopheles species diversity were assessed during the two seasons. Adult mosquitoes were collected from the legs of 20 adult volunteers in 5 randomly selected houses in the village between 6 p.m. and 8 a.m. on two consecutive nights using the HLC method. Bankeng was divided into 5 sectors of around 20 houses each, and one house was randomly selected in each sector given the 5 selected houses.For each house, HLCs of adult mosquitoes were performed both indoors (one collection point) and outdoors (one collection point) in houses at least 50 m apart. For both surveys (rainy and dry-seasons), the same houses were used for mosquito’s collection. Two volunteers worked during the first half of the night (from 6 p.m. to 0 a.m.), and the other two volunteers worked during the second half of the night (from 0 to 8 a.m.). Volunteer collectors were rotated between collection sites on different collection nights to minimize sampling bias. After mosquito capture, each collection tube containing mosquitoes was transferred to labeled bags according to the time of capture for assessment of mosquito aggressiveness by measuring the HBR. Collected adult Anopheles were then morphologically identified to species according to the dichotomous keys of Gillies and Coetzee41. HBR was expressed as the number of female An. gambiae s.l. per person per night, averaged for both outdoor and indoor collection sites, and averaged for both the rainy and dry-seasons.Each mosquito was then preserved in 1.5 ml Eppendorf tubes containing silica gel and stored at − 20 °C until further analysis. The head-thorax-midgut was used for serologic analysis to identify the infected mosquito and the leg wing for molecular analysis to identify Anopheles subspecies.For molecular identification, DNA was extracted from the legs and wings of each specimen according to the protocol of Collins et al.42 and PCR amplification for Anopheles subspecies identification was performed following the method of Fanello et al. which identifies species of An. gambiae complex43.For the estimation of mosquito IR, the enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) was used to detect circumsporozoite protein (CSP) antigen, and the IR was then calculated as the proportion of Anopheles species that tested positive for Plasmodium falciparum CSP antigen by ELISA. The head and thoracic-migut parts of each collected female Anopheles were separated from the rest of the body, homogenized in grinding buffer (0.5% casein, 0.1N NaOH, 1 × PBS) and tested for the presence of P. falciparum CSP Antigen44. To minimize false-positive CSP ELISA results, only high absorbance values (mean plus three standard deviations of negative controls) were considered. Once the IR was determined, the EIR was calculated for each season as the product of the IR and the HBR.Blood sampling and parasitological surveyFor each period, the parasitological survey was preceded by the entomological survey 2 weeks before.A drop of blood was taken from the fingertips of each individual and used for: (1) malaria rapid diagnostic test (SD Bioline Malaria Ag P.f/Pan Ag) performed directly on the field, (2) thick/thin blood smear realized on the field and examined at the laboratory at Centre Pasteur du Cameroun (CPC) for microscopic diagnosis and (3) dried blood spots on filter paper (Whatman 3 M) for molecular diagnosis of Plasmodium species and for the quantification of the level of human anti-gSG6-P1 IgG antibody response at the laboratory.Plasmodium falciparum parasitaemia was determined by microscopic examination of Giemsa-stained thick-blood smears and read with mineral oil at 100X. Parasite density was determined as the number of parasites per microL and counted against at least 200 leukocytes r, by assuming a leukocyte density of 8000 cells/microL of blood45. Positive samples from the rapid diagnostic test (RDT) and microscopic specimens were confirmed by multiplex polymerase chain reaction (PCR) according to a previously described protocol that allows the identification of five species of Plasmodium: P. falciparum, P. malariae, P. ovale, P. vivax and P. knowlesi46,47.During the parasitological survey, data collection sheets were used to collect data on socio-demographic characteristics (age, sex), GPS geographic location of home, and malaria prevention interventions (ownership and use of long-lasting insecticide-treated nets-LLITNs).All individuals who tested positive for malaria infection using RDT were treated directly free of charge with artemether/lumefantrine combination therapy in accordance with the treatment guidelines of the Cameroon National Malaria Control Program. All volunteers for the entomological study and before the experiments also received antimalarial chemoprophylaxis consisting of 100 mg doxycycline per day for the duration of the study and for one month afterwards.gSG6-P1 antigen and Human IgG antibody responsesThe recombinant Anopheles-specific salivary peptide gSG6-P1 peptide previously described by Poinsignon23, was designed, synthesized and purified (> 95%) by Genepep SA (Montpellier, France). All peptide batches were delivered in lyophilized peptide form, then suspended in ultrapure water and stored in aliquots at − 20 °C until use.The level of IgG Ab response to gSG6-P1 salivary peptide was measured on whole blood elutes obtained from standardized dried blood spots according to a protocol previously described by Drame et al.48. Briefly, 96-well Maxisorp plates (Nunc, Roskilde, Denmark) were precoated with 100 microL/well of gSG6-P1 salivary peptide solution (20 μg/ml of antigen in 100 microL of PBS 1 m, pH 7.4) and incubated for 2h30min at 37 °C. The plates were then blocked with 300 microL/well of protein-free PBS blocking buffer, pH 7.4 (Pierce, Thermo Scientific, France) for 45 min at 37 °C. Each eluted blood sample (1/50 dilution in PBS-Tween 1%) was incubated overnight at 4 °C in triplicate in the microtiter plates (2 wells with antigen labeled “Ag+” and 1 well without antigen labeled “Ag-”). A volume of 100 microL/well of biotin mouse anti-human IgG (secondary Ab solution, BD Pharmingen™) diluted at 1/2000 in PBS-Tween 1% buffer was added after 1 h 30 min of incubation at 37 °C. Streptavidine-peroxydase conjugate (GE Healthcare UK) was then added at 1/2000 dilution and incubated at 37 °C for for 1 h at 100 microL/well. Finally, a volume of 100 microL/well of substrate ABTS (2,2-azino-bis (3-ethylbenzthiazoline-6-sulfonic acid) diammonium; Thermo Scientific) in buffer solution (0.05 M citrate buffer, pH 4) and containing 10 microL of oxygenated water (30%) was added and incubated for 2 h in the dark at room temperature for the colorimetric development and the optical density (OD) was read at 405 nm.IgG response to the salivary peptide was also measured in 34 non-Anopheles exposed individuals from France (European volunteer blood donors with no history of travel to malaria endemic countries) and were used as negative controls. Blood samples for exposed individuals (sample of patient tested positive to malaria and also as they living in endemic area of malaria was obtain from the Haematology service of Centre Pasteur du Cameroun) were used as positive control. All these control were used to control plate-to-plate variation and the validation of our experiment.Data and statistical analysisThe IgG response to gSG6-P1 antigen was measured at the individual level and expressed as the ΔOD value: ΔOD = ODx − ODn, where ODx is the mean of the individual OD in both antigen wells and ODn is the individual OD in the well without gSG6-P1 antigen (to remove any non-specific reaction and background in each sample). For each sample analyzed, the experiment was validated only if the coefficient of variation (CV) between the two Ag+ wells was < 20%. Samples with CV > 20% were reanalyzed. All subjects with ∆OD > 0.20 (cut-off) were defined as immune responders to the gSG6-P1 peptide. The cut-off value was defined as the mean ΔOD of the negative control plus three times the standard deviation (SD) and the mean ∆OD of the positive control was higher to 0.20 (∆OD > 0.20).The Fisher exact test was used to compare qualitative variables. After verifying that the specific IgG response data (expressed as ΔOD) did not assume a Gaussian distribution, the non-parametric Mann–Whitney U test was used to compare antibody levels between two independent groups, the Wilcoxon matched-pairs test was used for the comparison of two paired groups and the Kruskal–Wallis for multiples comparison test between more than two groups. Only values p < 0.05 were considered significant. All statistical analyses were performed with GraphPad Prism5 software (San Diego, CA, USA).Ethical approval and consent to participateThis study was conducted according to the ethical guidelines for human research in Cameroon. The protocol of the study was approved by the Regional Center Ethics Committee for Human Health Research (CE N ˚ 1840/CRERSHC/2019). Prior to their enrollment in the study, the population was first informed on the purpose and process of the investigation (background, goals, methodology, study constraints, data confidentiality, and rights to opt out from the study). Signed informed consent was obtained from all participants above 21 years of age or older who agreed to participate in the study, and from the parent or legal guardian of minors (under 21 years of age in Cameroon). For minors (11–20 years of age), a signed informed assent was also obtained in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. Participation was voluntary, anonymous, and without compensation. Study design and populationA cross-sectional community-based study was conducted in the Bankeng village (4° 38,043″ N; 12° 13,003″ E), located in the Department of “Haute Sanaga”, Central Region of Cameroon, during the rainy season (May 2020) and the dry season (December 2020). The Bankeng village (about 400 inhabitants37) is located at the transition from forest to savannah on the National Road N°1 linking Yaoundé to Kousséri (Fig. 1).Figure 1Map showing the location of the Bankeng, a small Village in Central Cameroon. Map was created using QGIS software v2.18 (https://docs.qgis.org/2.18/en/docs/index.html).The locality is characterized by a classic equatorial rainfall regime with two dry seasons separated by two rainy seasons of unequal importance (from mid-March to June the long rainy season with important rainfall and from September to mid-November the short rainy season with less rainfall and more specifically from the first to the fifteenth of November when there is no more rain). The only malaria vector find in Bankeng belong to the genus of Anopheles gambiae complex, especially to An. gambiae ss (98.5%), and this vector exhibited a high level of resistance to almost all insecticides (93.9%) except to organophosphates38,39. As is the case across the country, the main control strategy used against exposure to mosquito bites is the Long-lasting insecticidal nets (LLIN) in Bankeng and the last distribution campaign which is universal coverage was taking place in 2019 during the survey period.The community had been sensitized a week earlier by community facilitators who invited them to participate in the study. After the study was presented to the community, all individuals who met the eligibility criteria and agreed to participate in the study were recruited after signing an informed consent form. For participants under the age of 21, parental or guardian consent and participant assent were obtained.To limit the selection and information bias, participants were consecutively recruited during the two seasons and participation in the study was voluntary. Eligibility for inclusion was defined as local residents who had not traveled outside the study area in the previous 3 weeks, as it is known that antibodies to the salivary peptide drop significantly in 3 weeks when exposure to Anopheles bites ceases or significantly reduces23,25. Pregnant women and individuals with severe clinical signs of malaria as defined by WHO40, were excluded.The study was approved by the National Ethics Committee for Human Health Research of Cameroon (CE N˚1840/CRERSHC/2019), and administrative authorization was obtained from the local head. Participation in the study was completely anonymous and without compensation. Data and statistical analysisThe IgG response to gSG6-P1 antigen was measured at the individual level and expressed as the ΔOD value: ΔOD = ODx − ODn, where ODx is the mean of the individual OD in both antigen wells and ODn is the individual OD in the well without gSG6-P1 antigen (to remove any non-specific reaction and background in each sample). For each sample analyzed, the experiment was validated only if the coefficient of variation (CV) between the two Ag+ wells was < 20%. Samples with CV > 20% were reanalyzed. All subjects with ∆OD > 0.20 (cut-off) were defined as immune responders to the gSG6-P1 peptide. The cut-off value was defined as the mean ΔOD of the negative control plus three times the standard deviation (SD) and the mean ∆OD of the positive control was higher to 0.20 (∆OD > 0.20).The Fisher exact test was used to compare qualitative variables. After verifying that the specific IgG response data (expressed as ΔOD) did not assume a Gaussian distribution, the non-parametric Mann–Whitney U test was used to compare antibody levels between two independent groups, the Wilcoxon matched-pairs test was used for the comparison of two paired groups and the Kruskal–Wallis for multiples comparison test between more than two groups. Only values p < 0.05 were considered significant. All statistical analyses were performed with GraphPad Prism5 software (San Diego, CA, USA).