2. Materials and MethodsA detailed list of basic chemical and biochemical reagents, as well as detailed oligonucleotide sequences used within this study, can be found in the Supplementary Materials.MCP-2 and Copoly Azide copolymers were synthesized as reported elsewhere . Transparent poly(ethylene terephthalate) foils for laser printers (Diamax, A4, d = 100 µm) were sourced from Argo (Warsaw, Poland). ARcare® 90445Q transparent, flexible adhesive tape was sourced from Adhesives Research Inc. (Glen Rock, PA, USA). Gold SPR slides (50 nm gold layer thickness) were purchased from Horiba Scientific (Palaiseau, France). DNA oligonucleotide sequences were purchased from Metabion GmbH (Planegg, Germany). All solutions were prepared using deionized (DI) water (conductivity < 0.055 μS/cm at 20 °C, TOC < 1.0 ppb). Human serum samples were obtained through a scientific collaboration with the National Institute of Public Health NIH—National Research Institute (Warsaw, Poland). “Positive” sera were collected from individuals infected at the time with the SARS-CoV-2 virus or had either recovered from COVID-19, while “negative” sera were sourced from healthy individuals before the outbreak of the pandemic. The Bioethics Committee of NIPH-NIH approved the study. Participants were informed about the study and gave consent to use the sample. Reference analyses of serum samples, classifying them as positive or negative, were conducted using standard serological ELISA and RT-PCR tests. Detailed protocols for conjugating receptor proteins with ssDNA anchors, purification of the conjugates, and procedures for classic ELISA assays and SPRi studies are provided in the Supplementary Materials.2.1. Fabrication of Polymer-Coated PET FoilsPrior to MCP-2/Copoly Azide polymer coating, hydrophilization of the bare PET foil surface was performed using a 10 min treatment with UV/ozone cleaner (Ossila, Sheffield, UK). Copoly (DMA-NAS-MAPS), whose commercial name is MCP-2, is a copolymer obtained by free radical polymerization of N,N-dimethylacrylamide (DMA, 97% molar fraction), N-acryloyloxysuccinimide (NAS, 2% molar fraction), and 3-(trimethoxysilyl)propyl methacrylate (MAPS, 1% molar fraction). The principal constituent of Copoly (DMA-NAS-MAPS), dimethylacrylamide (DMA), forms the polymer backbone and ensures strong passive adsorption to variety of materials. NAS is the chemically reactive monomer responsible for probe immobilization through nucleophilic substitution with amine groups on biomolecules. The same monomer is exploited in post-polymerization modifications. In these reactions, NAS is reacted with linkers that contain amine groups to introduce novel functionalities into the polymer backbone. Using this strategy, Copoly Azide was synthesized. Specifically, after the polymerization of DMA, NAS, and MAPS (95, 4, and 1% molar fraction, respectively) the obtained polymer was reacted with 2.5 equivalents of 11-azido-3,6,9-trioxaundecan-1-amine, as described elsewhere. The MCP-2 and Copoly Azide structures are shown in Figure S1. The layer obtained with reactive copolymers has a dual role: antifouling properties due to blocking surface sites via hydrogen bonds, and bearing reactive groups that enable controlled interactions with biomolecules. The functional groups of the copolymers were characterized using FT-IR and NMR analysis .For coatings, copolymers were dissolved in DI water to a final concentration of 2% w/v and then diluted 1:1 with a solution of 1.6 M ammonium sulfate. The MCP-2 polymer was used for the direct covalent immobilization of receptor proteins. The Copoly Azide polymer is capable of click-chemistry reactions with DBCO-conjugated DNA probes. This enables DNA-directed immobilization of protein–oligonucleotide conjugates. The foil was dip-coated for 1 h with the chosen copolymer, then rinsed with DI water, dried under compressed air, and cured under vacuum at 80 °C for 15 min. The immobilization in predefined spots was possible thanks to the adhesive tape used to produce the rims of microwells. Holes, 5 mm in diameter, positioned in 96-well plate format, were cut with a VLS2.30 CO2 laser plotter (Universal Laser Systems, Vienna, Austria).The coating of PET foil coating with MCP-2 and Copoly Azide involves the passive attachment of the copolymers through weak, non-covalent interactions such as hydrogen bonding, Van der Waals, and hydrophobic interactions with the surface. Following dip coating, polymerization occurs, forming a stable and robust polymer layer that enables further immobilization of biomolecules. The morphological and chemical properties of passive coating have already been examined by means of atomic force microscopy and X-ray photoemission spectroscopy .2.2. Protein Immobilization on PETProtein receptor immobilization on modified PET substrates was achieved in two ways: through direct coupling to amine-reactive MCP-2 and indirectly via DNA-directed immobilization using oligonucleotide probes tethered to Copoly Azide . For covalent attachment of proteins on MCP-2-coated foil, a 20 µg/mL solution of SARS-CoV Nucleocapsid recombinant protein (or another SARS-CoV-2 antigen) in PBS was dispensed onto microarray spots (11 µL each) and incubated overnight at 4 °C in a humid atmosphere. The remaining reactive sites were then blocked by applying 20 µL of PBST with 3% BSA for 30 min, followed by rinsing with PBST and drying under compressed air. For DDI on Copoly Azide-coated foil, a 20 µg/mL solution of DBCO-modified DNA in DI was dispensed onto microarray spots (11 µL each) and incubated overnight at 4 °C in a humid atmosphere. Chromatographically purified fractions of ssDNA conjugates with recombinant SARS-CoV-2 nucleoprotein or monoclonal anti-human IgG antibody (~150 nM in 50 mM phosphate buffer, pH 7.2, with 150 mM NaCl) were then dispensed as 11 µL spots onto the DNA-coated foil. After 1 h of incubation, the substrate was rinsed with PBS containing 10 mM Mg(NO3)2 and dried under compressed air. The blocking steps were identical to those used for covalent immobilization.2.3. ELISA-like Assays on PET FoilsTwo types of immunoreactions were performed in the prepared microwells on PET foils. Indirect immunolabeling was used to detect immunoglobulin subclasses in human sera, utilizing specific monoclonal mouse antibodies and an anti-mouse IgG–alkaline phosphatase conjugate. In contrast, direct immunolabeling with an anti-human IgG/IgA–alkaline phosphatase (ALP) conjugate was employed to detect total IgG and IgG/IgA classes of anti-NP antibodies in human sera. The detailed composition of each assay is provided in Section 3. According to the general protocol, 11 µL of the diluted serum or appropriate target antibody was incubated for 1 h at room temperature in a humid atmosphere, rinsed with PBST, and dried under compressed air. Then, 11 µL of the antibody–ALP conjugate (direct assay) or appropriate secondary antibodies (indirect assay) in PBST buffer with 3% BSA were added to each well, incubated for 1 h at room temperature in a humid atmosphere, rinsed with PBST, and dried under compressed air. Proper antibodies were used at 1 µg/mL, and the antibody–ALP conjugate at 3 µg/mL. For the indirect assay, the antibody–ALP conjugate was added in the third step (incubation and dilution procedure the same as for the direct assay). For quantitative analysis, 10 mM freshly prepared p-nitrophenyl phosphate (PNNP) in 50 mM carbonate buffer pH 9.6 was used as the ALP substrate. An enzymatic reaction was initiated by dispensing 11 µL of PNNP substrate into each microwell, followed by incubation in a humid atmosphere for 12 min. Subsequently, 8 µL of substrate solution was collected from each spot and transferred to a multi-well plate containing 150 µL of 50 mM carbonate buffer (pH 9.6). Absorbance was measured at 405 nm using a Multiskan Go microplate reader (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA).