DISCUSSIONInitially changing soluble p‐tau species track Aβ plaque reduction, while ptau205 and MTBR‐243 reflect tau tangle pathology, informing different pathways of therapeutic strategies. 4DISCUSSIONThe co‐development of effective Aβ‐plaque lowering therapies and methods for comprehensively measuring soluble tau proteins has provided the opportunity to validate recent natural history studies linking the two canonical pathologies of AD (Aβ‐plaques and tau tangles). Specifically, interventional studies like this provide key information to move from association to causal relationships. In this study, we assessed the effects of both Aβ‐plaque targeting and soluble Aβ‐monomer targeting therapies on multiple CSF tau biomarkers. Our findings clearly indicate that increased phosphorylation of specific regions of the tau protein correlate with Aβ‐PET in the setting of DIAD; they are temporally linked to the initial rise in Aβ‐PET and decrease as Aβ‐PET is pharmacologically reduced. In contrast, we confirmed the relationship between selected tau tangle‐related CSF tau biomarkers, particularly MTBR‐tau243 and p‐tau205, and tau PET, but not amyloid PET. These findings demonstrate that amyloid‐related CSF tau biomarkers phosphorylated at tau residues 181, 217, and 231 indicate the amount and change in amyloid plaques, while p‐tau205 and MTBR‐tau243 are biomarkers of tau NFT pathology measured by tau PET. The combination of biofluid and PET biomarkers of Aβ and tau, along with the selective Aβ‐plaque reduction from gantenerumab, provides strong experimental support for recent natural history studies that suggest state dependent tau changes in AD.Multiple natural history studies of DIAD and sAD 1 , 2 , 4 , 5 , 7 , 34 , 35 , 36 , 37 have identified correlations between the development of Aβ‐pathology and the increase in multiple CSF phospho‐tau levels, particularly p‐tau217 and p‐tau231. Likewise, Aβ‐lowering immunotherapy trials in sAD have demonstrated decreases in plasma measurements of p‐tau181 and 217 38 , 39 , 40 in parallel with reductions in Aβ‐PET. 15 , 16 , 41 Our current results, along Aβ‐plaque lowering trials in sAD 14 , 16 , 41 validate increases in p‐tau217 as a marker of Aβ‐plaque pathology as measured by PET. Although this does not mechanistically prove Aβ‐plaques cause the elevation of amyloid‐related CSF tau biomarkers, the unique association of these changes of p‐tau in AD and not other proteinopathies, the temporal links with Aβ‐plaque changes, and now the clear associations with an intervention that lowers Aβ‐plaques, but not tau NFTs, provides strong validation for a direct link of these initial stage CSF p‐tau measures and amyloid plaques. Our findings of a consistent negative association between the rate of change of amyloid‐related tau biomarkers and tau PET, Figure 3, reinforces the distinction between the tau biomarkers that first emerge with Aβ‐plaques and respond to therapies that lowers Aβ‐plaques but have minimal effect on tau PET. The difference in the magnitude of the negative associations of the amyloid related tau biomarkers may reflect differences in the concentrations, and thus variability, and/or could also reflect differences how these biomarkers change with NFTs. There is increasing evidence that pT217 has a more dynamic relationship based on the stage of disease ‐i.e. early elevation with Aβ‐plaques, but a greater association with tau PET at later stages of disease. 42 The high concordance between a normal Aβ‐PET level and a normal pT217/T217 ratio also suggests that p‐tau217 could be used to monitor for an initial and substantial response to Aβ‐plaque lowering therapies in the context of AD. This could be particularly advantageous given the availability of blood‐based p‐tau217 assays, and the minimally invasive nature of phlebotomy. However, recent trials in sAD that have resulted in Aβ‐PET levels decreasing to levels near normal, have resulted in phosphorylated tau measures decreasing to approximately fifty percent of normal levels. 19 Whether this discrepancy in magnitude reduction of Aβ‐PET and soluble p‐tau with amyloid immunotherapy represents a continued contribution of NFTs to all p‐tau measures, or whether there are other amyloid aggregates not detectable by PET still driving p‐tau phosphorylation, or longer treatment with Aβ‐plaque lowering therapies is needed, remains to be determined. Despite the engagement of Aβ‐monomers by solanezumab, there was no effect on any of the Aβ‐plaque associated phospho‐tau biomarkers. This, again, reinforces the unique association with initial phospho‐tau biomarkers as a reaction to substantial Aβ‐plaque pathology.In contrast to the progress in therapies lowering Aβ‐plaque pathology, significantly less progress has been made in identifying agents that can lower NFT pathology. An exception is recent phase 1 trial data on antisense oligonucleotide therapies. 43 Future studies should evaluate the potentially causal link between putative tau tangle‐related CSF tau biomarkers, pT205/T205 and MTBR‐tau243, and NFT (tau PET). Although neither gantenerumab nor solanezumab influenced these soluble late‐stage CSF NFT pathology measures or tau PET, with the exception of a potential increase in MTBR‐tau243 in solanezumab treated group, we were able to demonstrate important longitudinal associations between these tau tangle‐related CSF tau biomarkers and tau PET. For all groups in this study, the correlations for the rate of change were highest between MTBR‐tau243 and tau PET. Interestingly, although pT205/T205 levels increased closer to disease onset, when tau PET increases, the rate of change was not highly correlated with tau PET change. Yet, the reduction of PiB PET and pT217/T217 in the gantenerumab treated group was not replicated with pT205/T205. This suggests that the phosphorylation of T205 marks a distinct phase in the course of tauopathy in AD. 44 , 45 Despite the relatively small number of individuals included in this study, the association of late‐stage fluid biomarkers with tau‐PET support recent cross‐sectional studies from larger numbers of at‐risk and symptomatic sAD. 6 Together, these results further the concept that tau‐related fluid biomarkers inform the state and stage of AD. This has resulted in different soluble tau biomarkers being included in the updated Alzheimer Association's Diagnosis and Staging of AD criteria. 46 Specifically, p‐tau217 is now proposed as a core biological marker of amyloid pathology, sufficient to identify this key pathobiological process of AD. Likewise, p‐tau205 and MTBR‐tau243 and other soluble tau measures are included as potential markers of a later biological pathobiological stage of AD more closely associated with clinical symptoms. Additional clinical trial data from larger Aβ‐immunotherapy trials will further validate this staging. Further work is needed with therapies that lower NFT pathology to validate measures like MTBR‐tau243 as biomarkers of tau aggregates.An important limitation for this work is the inclusion of DIAD participants only, which may limit generalizability to sAD. However, recent analyses of these same CSF tau‐related measures have identified very similar temporal associations with disease progression in sAD (amyloid‐ and tau‐related biomarkers), and similarly strong correlations between Aβ‐plaque or tau PET and initial‐ and later‐stage tau biomarkers. Moreover, recent clinical trials of multiple Aβ‐plaque lowering therapies that have evaluated soluble (plasma or CSF) phospho‐tau measures have demonstrated similar associations between Aβ‐plaque reduction and substantial reductions of initial tau biomarkers. 11 , 13 , 16 , 41 , 47 This suggest the results from our study in DIAD are likely applicable to sAD, but analyses on the late‐stage tau biomarkers are needed in sAD interventional trials that remove plaques or lower tangles, to further assess this. Another limitation of this work is the lack of plasma tau biomarkers available to assess for similarities to CSF measures. Lastly, the post‐hoc nature of these studies and the relatively limited numbers do not support sub‐group analyses, although the strong and consistent biological effects provide sufficient power for conclusions.This study suggests that, in AD, the presence and reduction of Aβ‐plaque pathology can be measured not only by Aβ specific biomarkers but certain phospho‐tau biomarkers as well. The development of blood‐based phospho‐tau measures, like p‐tau217 concentrations and ratios, offers an important opportunity to monitor the initial response to anti‐Aβ‐plaque therapies through repeated measures using non‐invasive, more accessible techniques. Ongoing and future studies targeting tau pathology may clarify the associations between specific soluble biomarkers and NFTs and determine whether tau therapies could also be monitored with blood or CSF measures.