ConclusionResponse to ocrelizumab is linked to baseline regulatory and post-treatment effector B- and T-cell subset populations. Memory B-cells appear to be a marker of treatment efficacy for ocrelizumab. DiscussionIn this study, we identified several new effector and regulatory B and T-cell subsets that are associated with reduced treatment efficacy in patients with MS under ocrelizumab treatment. Around two-thirds of our patients achieved NEDA-3 in a 12-month follow-up period, which is slightly lower than for previously reported cohorts (5). A possible underlying reason for this discrepancy might be that, as per the national regulations, ocrelizumab is commenced in patients with RRMS unresponsive to other immunomodulating drugs. Thus, inadvertently, the patients of our cohort were relatively aged and at a relatively advanced stage of their disease course.Failure to achieve NEDA-3 under ocrelizumab treatment has been associated with high disease activity at baseline (7). Although clinical features of our patients with NEDA-3 and EDA-3 were statistically comparable, EDA-3 patients showed trends towards exhibiting longer disease duration and higher number of attacks at baseline, in line with the literature (5).There were no drop-outs in our study and, as expected, patients under ocrelizumab treatment showed significantly suppressed total B-cell, plasma cell and CD3+ CD20+ cell populations, indicating good patient compliance and drug efficacy. More importantly, our results emphasize once again that ocrelizumab does not cause a global decrease in all B-cell subsets but rather reorganizes B-cell subset distribution, repopulates regulatory cell subsets, and modulates B-cell regulating factors (4,10).An important finding of our study was the failure of ocrelizumab to suppress effector switched memory B-cell and plasmablast subsets. Failure to suppress switched memory B-cells, essential for rapid secondary immune responses, and antibody-secreting cells is well-known for its association with reduced response to treatment in autoimmune disorders (8,11,12). Furthermore, tumor necrosis factor-α neutralizing infliximab and B-cell activating factor atacicept worsen MS symptoms at least partially through augmentation of memory B-cell functions (12). In agreement with these views, our patients with RRMS exhibiting higher plasmablast and memory B-cell populations under ocrelizumab treatment tended to have higher EDSS scores and EDA-3 status, respectively.Another seemingly negative effect of ocrelizumab treatment was failure to enhance regulatory B-cell populations. In contrast, ocrelizumab increased the ratio of regulatory B-1a cells, which are associated with early immune responses. Patients with higher baseline B-1a populations were more likely to achieve the NEDA-3 status, implying that this B-cell subset is involved in regulation of inflammation in MS. B-1a cells have a controversial role in autoimmunity. While B-1a cells are essential for immune tolerance, they have also been implied to contribute to inflammation in several autoimmune disorders, as well as in the animal model of MS (13-16). The impact of ocrelizumab on regulatory B-cells is relatively unknown and warrants further exploration.CD3+ and CD4+ T-cell populations were relatively increased under ocrelizumab treatment, putatively as a natural consequence of reduced B-cell populations (5,17). Another important finding was the increase of CD4+ and CD8+ naïve T-cell populations, which may putatively be the byproduct of reduction of anti-neuronal effector T-cell populations dedicated to autoimmunity. As a matter of fact, patients with higher naïve T-cell populations showed trends towards lower EDSS scores and higher rates of NEDA-3 status. This effect of ocrelizumab might constitute an advantage over fingolimod, which reduces both naïve and effector T-cells (18).Reduction of T-cells under ocrelizumab treatment has often been attributed to the suppression of CD20+ T-cells (3). Alternatively, B-cells stimulate auto-reactive T-cells through pro-inflammatory cytokine production and antigen presentation in brain parenchyma and meningeal follicles (12). Reduction of B-cells under ocrelizumab treatment might contribute to reduced B-cell-dependent T-cell proliferation and subsequently reduced autoreactive T-cell populations (19,20).Regulatory T-cell subsets were repopulated under ocrelizumab treatment especially at month 12, as reported (4,21). Additionally, NEDA-3 patients exhibited significantly higher baseline CD49d+ regulatory T-cell populations than EDA-3 patients. Anti-inflammatory cytokines, such as interleukin-10 and transforming growth factor β produced by these regulatory cells might contribute to suppression of inflammation and disease severity in MS (22,23). ConclusionOur findings indicate that ocrelizumab selectively modulates B- and T-cell subsets involved in both early and long-term immune responses, suggesting an impact on lymphocyte maturation and memory cell formation, which may have implications for adaptive immunity. NEDA-3 status and reduced disease activity under ocrelizumab are generally associated with increased baseline populations of regulatory B and T-cells and reduced post-treatment populations of effector B and T-cells. Failure to suppress switched memory B-cell populations appears to be a hazard for treatment efficacy of ocrelizumab in MS.