METHODSThe panel conducted a systematic review to assess the diagnostic accuracy of BBMs in detecting AD pathology. The BBMs of interest included plasma phosphorylated‐tau (p‐tau) and amyloid‐beta (Aβ) tests measuring the following analytes: p‐tau217, ratio of p‐tau217 to non‐p‐tau217 ×100 (%p‐tau17), p‐tau181, p‐tau231, and ratio of Aβ42 to Aβ40. The reference standard tests included cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) AD biomarkers, amyloid positron emission tomography (PET), or neuropathology. The panel applied the Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development, and Evaluation (GRADE) approach to assess the certainty of the evidence and the GRADE evidence‐to‐decision (EtD) Framework to develop its recommendations. 2METHODSThe guideline was developed in accordance with the AGREE II Reporting Checklist 20 and the Guidelines International Network‐McMaster Guideline Development Checklist. 21 The overall guideline development process, including funding of the work, panel formation, management of conflicts of interest, internal and external review, and organizational approval, was guided by Alzheimer's Association's policies and procedures.2.1Guideline panel compositionThe chairs of the guideline panel were selected by the leadership of the Alzheimer's Association. The panel was composed of 11 members: clinical neurologists (S.Pal., M.S.‐C., S.S., D.G.), geriatricians (H.W., H.O.), nurse practitioner (L.A.), physician assistant (M.P.), and subject‐matter experts, some with clinical expertise (C.T., H.Z., T.K.). Panelists were of diverse geographic distribution and years of clinical experience; six were based in North America, four in Europe, and two held dual affiliations in both regions. To ensure the integrity of the guideline development process, the panel elected to replace one of the co‐chairs when a change in their employment status introduced a potential conflict of interest that would have been challenging to mitigate (see the Acknowledgments section).Three guideline methodologists (L.A.K., S.Pah., M.P.T.) oversaw all methodological aspects of the guideline development, including collaboration on the development and execution of a search strategy with a medical librarian (M.B.M.), and two (S.Pah., L.A.K.) oversaw the identification and synthesis of scientific evidence and the evidence‐to‐decision (EtD) process for the clinical question. The Alzheimer's Association's staff, who also served as subject‐matter experts (R.M.E., S.M., S.Pah., M.P.T.), oversaw all administrative and logistical aspects related to the guideline panel, including the managment of conflicts of interest.2.2Target audienceThis guideline's primary target audience includes specialists involved in the diagnostic evaluation of cognitive impairment in specialized care settings. A specialist in this context is defined as a healthcare provider, typically, but not exclusively, in neurology, psychiatry, or geriatrics, who spends at least 25% of their clinical practice time caring for adults with cognitive impairment or dementia. Not all clinicians in these fields are dementia specialists, and providers in other areas of practice may identify as a specialist based on their specific knowledge and training. Specialists are proficient in assessing, diagnosing and treating cognitive disorders, understanding and interpreting the results of brain imaging, CSF, and BBM tests, and clearly communicating the results of the aforementioned tests and their implications to patients and families. 22 Primary care providers, nurse practitioners, and physician assistants working in these specialized care settings are also included in the primary target audience. While non‐specialty care providers working in primary care settings and healthcare professionals in nursing homes and long‐term care facilities are not the intended target audience, this guideline may serve as a resource to enhance their understanding of BBM use in AD diagnostic workup, particularly as such tests are being increasingly marketed for use in non‐specialty care settings.This guideline is intended to inform clinical decision‐making, support the development of standards of care, guide laboratory practices, and assist clinicians in selecting appropriate BBM tests for individual patients. In addition, it may help inform the use of BBMs and their incorporation in clinical trial outcomes or decisions in clinical trials with adaptive design.The secondary target audience includes individuals affected by MCI or dementia, their caregivers, policy‐makers involved in dementia care and healthcare decision‐making, and laboratory medicine specialists involved in using BBMs.2.3Guideline scopeThe panel identified two key clinical questions that warrant recommendation in this first iteration of the guideline: Should a BBM test be incorporated as a triaging test to determine the presence or absence of AD pathology in the diagnostic workup of individuals with cognitive impairment (including those with MCI or dementia) presenting for specialized care for memory disorders?Should a BBM test serve as a substitute for CSF analysis or amyloid PET as a confirmatory test to determine the presence or absence of AD pathology in the diagnostic workup of patients with cognitive impairment (MCI or dementia) presenting for specialized care for memory disorders? A triaging test refers to a test in which a negative result rules out AD pathology with high probability, whereas a positive result should be confirmed using another method, such as CSF AD biomarkers or amyloid PET.A confirmatory test refers to a test for which a negative result rules out AD pathology, and a positive test confirms AD pathology with a high probability.Input on these questions was gathered during the 2024 Alzheimer's Association International Conference (AAIC), where experts in the field provided insights to inform the development of this guideline.This guideline is not intended to serve as a comprehensive clinical pathway or appropriate use recommendations for the broader diagnostic workup or treatment decision‐making in individuals with MCI or dementia. It does not address the use of BBMs for screening purposes, use in non‐specialty settings, or use in people with no cognitive concerns or only subjective memory impairment.2.3.1Population and settingThe population and setting for this guideline include individuals with objective cognitive impairment (i.e., MCI or dementia) presenting to specialized care settings due to cognitive complaints. Objective cognitive impairment requires objective evidence of cognitive deficits detected by cognitive assessment tools and/or medical examination and provider assessment. It does not include subjective cognitive decline, in which the patient perceives changes in memory or other cognitive domains but performs as expected on cognitive testing, and a trained provider does not detect notable deficits (e.g., aphasia, disinhibition, executive dysfunction) in assessment.The panel developed recommendations for BBM testing only in individuals with objective cognitive impairment who have already completed a comprehensive clinical workup. This guideline does not extend to cognitively unimpaired individuals, given the current lack of clinical relevance for BBM use in this population. The panel made the a priori decision not to use data for cognitively impaired and unimpaired populations combined to inform recommendations to minimize indirectness and because test performance could appear more favorable in populations with a bimodal distribution of brain amyloid (i.e., individuals with very low [cognitively unimpaired] or very high [AD‐like dementia] brain amyloid levels).This work focuses on specialized care settings, which include practices where a memory disorder specialist (defined in Section 2.3 above) is participating in the decision of whether to order a BBM test for possible AD diagnosis. While this work prioritizes specialized care settings due to the existing evidence base, future iterations will address the use of BBMs in primary care. The panel recognizes the critical role of primary care as the first point of contact for many patients with cognitive concerns, and that access to specialized care is often limited.The panel determined that primary care and specialized care settings merit separate CPG processes for four main reasons. First, among patients presenting with cognitive impairment, we expect a different prevalence of AD pathology in primary care versus specialized care settings. Different population prevalence means that the same test will have different negative predictive value (NPV) and positive predictive value (PPV), which could alter panel recommendations. Second, pretest probability must be considered in setting acceptable thresholds for sensitivity and specificity, and evidence suggests that pretest probability for AD pathology is more accurate when determined in specialist than in non‐specialist settings. 5 Third, there is limited experience among non‐specialists in interpreting and disclosing AD biomarker results and a greater prevalence of comorbid conditions may affect BBM results in these settings. Fourth, practical barriers such as time constraints and limited integration of BBMs into existing clinical workflows in non‐specialized care settings pose further challenges. Addressing these challenges will require targeted education, decision support tools, and equitable implementation strategies to ensure BBMs can be effectively and appropriately used across all care settings.2.3.2BBM tests and reference standardsThe panel was mindful that many BBM tests measuring the same analyte (e.g., p‐tau217) utilize different technology or utilize different antibodies and can achieve different performance characteristics. Therefore, for this guideline, a BBM test is defined as the combination of a BBM (analyte) and the technology used to measure it (e.g., specific immunoassay or mass spectrometry method). For this initial iteration of the guideline, the panel identified plasma assays for phosphorylated‐tau (p‐tau) and Aβ, measuring the following analytes: p‐tau217, the ratio of p‐tau217 to non‐p‐tau217 ×100 (expressed as a percentage of p‐tau217 [%p‐tau217]), p‐tau181, p‐tau231, and Aβ42/Aβ40. To ensure the systematic review was both feasible and clinically relevant, we focused on a limited number of BBMs rather than attempting a broad meta‐analysis across all possible available BBM tests. The panel thus prioritized BBMs most commonly used as indicators of brain amyloid, excluding markers like glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) and neurofilament light chain (NfL). We also chose to analyze tests that measure single analytes rather than ratios, unless the ratio included a reference value of the same protein type (i.e., Aβ42/Aβ40). Based on available evidence and head‐to‐head comparison data, including Round Robin results, 23 we selected the p‐tau species with the strongest evidence base and highest diagnostic accuracy. The reference standard tests considered were CSF AD biomarkers, amyloid PET, or neuropathological assessment of AD.Despite analyzing the specific assays/analytes in the systematic review, the panel opted for a brand‐agnostic, blinded, performance‐based approach for the guideline's recommendations. This approach ensures the guideline's credibility, durability, and actionability. It protects the guideline from perceived bias, reduces misalignment with recent advances, and provides clinicians with meaningful direction. By linking the CPG to our systematic review, we will be able to ensure ongoing relevance without requiring frequent changes to the recommendations themselves.The authors acknowledge that several BBM tests on the market have no published data meeting the eligibility criteria for inclusion in the systematic review; we encourage the manufacturers of these tests to publish evidence on the diagnostic test accuracy of their tests in peer‐reviewed journals.2.4Evidence reviewThis guideline has been informed by a corresponding systematic review of diagnostic test accuracy, published separately; please refer to that publication for a more detailed description of the systematic review methodology. 19 A summary of tests meeting the criteria for a triaging or confirmatory test is also shown at https://app.magicapp.org/#/guideline/nyO1Yj.Briefly, the following databases were searched from 2019 through November 3, 2024: PubMed, Medline, Embase, and Cochrane Library. Methodologists conducted study selection, data extraction, risk of bias, and certainty assessments, and statisticians performed data analysis. Details regarding the literature search strategy can be found in the Supporting Information.Raw data were sought, including the number of true positives (TP), true negatives (TN), false positives (FP), false negatives (FN), sensitivity (Sn), and specificity (Sp), at the Youden index cutoff. Data were sourced from (1) published studies, (2) author‐provided information when missing from studies, and (3) Sn and Sp associated with the Youden index derived from receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves using WebPlotDigitizer 24 when neither published nor provided by authors.Meta‐analyses of diagnostic test accuracy were conducted for each BBM test to calculate pooled Sn and Sp. The main meta‐analysis examined single cutoffs based on Youden's index. Additional sensitivity analyses were conducted to assess the robustness of the data based on reported versus missing data: (1) reported data only using any cutoff for the index test, (2) reported data using any cutoff for the index test plus data derived from curves at Youden's index when data was missing, (3) fixing Sp cutoff at 75% for triaging, and (4) fixing Sn cutoff at 90% for confirmatory testing.The guideline panel assessed the certainty of the supporting evidence and formulated the recommendations according to the GRADE approach. 25 The certainty of the evidence for each analyzed test was determined by assessing the following domains: risk of bias, indirectness, inconsistency, imprecision, and publication bias. This information is reported in the Evidence Profiles. The certainty of evidence for Sn was assessed separately from that for Sp, including considerations of inconsistency and imprecision. Sensitivity carried greater weight for certainty of evidence in triaging decisions (when an initial BBM test is performed with the plan to follow‐up confirmatory testing if positive) to ensure accurate identification of true cases, while Sp carried a greater weight for certainty of evidence in confirmatory testing (when only the BBM test is used without additional biomarker assessment) to minimize FPs.2.5Formulating recommendations2.5.1Test accuracyThe panel decided not to make recommendations for or against specific tests; this decision reflects several considerations, including variability in how tests are developed, validated, and implemented across laboratories. Furthermore, manufacturers and laboratories do not typically rely on meta‐analyses to determine test cutoffs for abnormality, and some are even recommending two cutoff approaches. These inconsistencies further support the panel's position that ranking or endorsing specific tests is premature at this time. Instead, test accuracy data and accuracy judgments reported in this guideline are meant to serve as a resource for clinicians implementing the recommendations to aid them in choosing which test(s) to order.The panel aligned clinical thresholds for acceptable accuracy of BBM tests based on what clinicians in real‐world settings would find acceptable and used recent expert opinion as a starting point for that discussion. 15 Therefore, a given test was judged “accurate” at the triaging level if the point estimate for Sn was at least 90% and the Sp at least 75%. For the “confirmatory” level, the point estimates had to be at least 90% for both Sn and Sp.A given patient's pretest probability for AD pathology will vary according to clinical presentation, age, and known risk factors. 26 Therefore, the panel chose not to report predictive values associated with individual tests, since these metrics would be highly dependent on pretest probability. Instead, we note that a test with a Sn of 90% and Sp of 75% (our “triage” thresholds) would have a PPV of 47%, 78%, or 94%, and NPV of 97%, 88%, 65%, when applied in a population with a pretest probability of 20%, 50%, or 80%, respectively. A test with a Sn of 90% and Sp of 90% (our “confirmatory” thresholds) would have a PPV of 69%, 90%, or 97%, and NPV of 97%, 90%, 69%, when applied in a population with a pretest probability of 20%, 50%, or 80%, respectively.Because Youden's index cutoff is not always an optimal combination of Sn and Sp, we supplemented with analyses of fixed sensitivity at 90% and fixed specificity at 75% when data were available.2.5.2EtD frameworkThe EtD framework was used to translate evidence summaries into practice recommendations. 27 Recommendations are labeled either as “strong” or “conditional” according to an evaluation of the certainty of the evidence, the balance between benefits and harms, patients’ values and preferences, resources/cost, and other factors such as acceptability, feasibility, and equity. “The panel recommends” indicates a strong recommendation, and “the panel suggests” indicates a conditional recommendation. Table 1 provides the suggested interpretation of strong and conditional recommendations for patients, clinicians, and healthcare policy‐makers. 28 , 29 , 30 To reduce potential bias, the panel was blinded to the names of the tests until after recommendations were drafted.TABLE 1Definitions for interpreting the certainty of the evidence and implementing strong versus conditional recommendations 28 , 29 , 30 DEFINITION OF CERTAINTY OF THE EVIDENCECategoryDefinitionHighVery confident that the true effect lies close to that of the estimate of the effect.ModerateModerately confident in the effect estimate; the true effect is likely to be close to the estimate of the effect, but there is a possibility that it is substantially different.LowConfidence in the effect estimate is limited; the true effect may be substantially different from the estimate of the effect.Very lowVery little confidence in the effect estimate; the true effect is likely to be substantially different from the estimate of the effect.DEFINITION OF STRONG VS. CONDITIONAL RECOMMENDATIONS AND IMPLICATIONS FOR COLLABORATIVE PARTIESImplicationsStrong recommendationsConditional recommendationsFor patientsMost patients in this situation would want the recommended course of action, and only a small proportion would not. Formal decision aids are not likely to be needed to help individuals make decisions consistent with their values and preferences.Most patients in this situation would want the suggested course of action, but many would not.For cliniciansMost patients should receive this course of action. Adherence to this recommendation, according to the guideline, could be used as a quality criterion or performance indicator.Recognize that different choices will be appropriate for individual patients and that you must help each patient arrive at a management decision consistent with his or her values and preferences. Decision aids may be useful in helping patients make decisions consistent with their values and preferences.For policy‐makersThe recommendation can be adapted as policy in most situations.Policy‐making will require substantial debate and the involvement of various collaborative parties.ResearchersThe recommendation is supported by credible research or other convincing judgments that make additional research unlikely to alter the recommendation. On occasion, a strong recommendation is based on low or very low certainty in the evidence. In such instances, further research may provide important information that alters the recommendations.The recommendation is likely to be strengthened (for future updates or adaptation) by additional research. An evaluation of the conditions and criteria (and the related judgments, research evidence, and additional considerations) that determined the conditional (rather than strong) recommendation will help to identify possible research gaps.John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.Non‐systematic literature searches, along with panel opinion and experience, were used to inform the research evidence for EtD factors as needed.Methodologists worked with health economists to summarize published evidence on the cost and cost‐effectiveness of implementing BBMs in specialized care settings. Publicly available sources were used to compare the prices of commercially available BBM tests. A non‐systematic literature review was conducted to identify peer‐reviewed studies assessing the cost‐effectiveness of BBM tests in the diagnostic workup of suspected AD.Input from the Association National Early‐Stage Advisory Group (ESAG) made up of patients with early‐stage AD, internal and external collaborative parties, and feedback from a public comment period also informed the final recommendations.2.6Guideline update process and external review processA draft version of the recommendations was made publicly available, and all feedback submitted during the public comment period (May 12 to May 23) was reviewed by the methods team and the panel. Comments that fell within the scope of the guideline questions and were supported by the available evidence were considered for incorporation into the final guidance. To promote transparency and acknowledge collaborative party contributions, all de‐identified comments, where possible, will be made publicly accessible on the Alzheimer's Association Website https://www.alz.org/professionals/health-systems-medical-professionals/clinical-practice-guidelines-and-evidence.This guideline is intended to serve as a regularly updated document and the associated systematic review will be regularly updated as new evidence emerges through the MAGICapp platform https://app.magicapp.org/#/guideline/nyO1Yj to maintain relevance for clinical practice over time.2.7How to use this guidelineThese recommendations are designed to support clinicians, patients, caregivers, policy‐makers, and healthcare decision‐makers in making evidence‐informed decisions, specifically regarding which BBM test(s) to use and whether it/they should be used as a triaging or confirmatory test for AD pathology in specialized care settings. The recommendations are not meant to restrict, limit, delay, or deny clinical use, insurance coverage, or patient access to biomarker testing when deemed appropriate by a qualified healthcare provider. Furthermore, these recommendations do not substitute for clinical judgment nor encompass all possible considerations in the diagnostic and therapeutic evaluation of AD. We advise clinicians to exercise discretion and adapt their approach based on individual patient circumstances and emerging evidence.