BackgroundNoninvasive biomarkers for diagnosing and monitoring eosinophilic esophagitis (EoE) are currently lacking. This study evaluates 20 biomarkers in serum and saliva, aiming to assess their diagnostic potential in pediatric EoE patients and healthy individuals. 1INTRODUCTIONEosinophilic esophagitis (EoE) is a chronic type 2 (T2)‐inflammatory condition that affects the esophagus and can manifest in early childhood. 1 It is distinguished by an abnormal accumulation of eosinophils in the esophageal lining, presenting a spectrum of symptoms including slow eating, dysphagia, and vomiting or nausea. 2 Early diagnosis by histological analysis and appropriate management strategies, which often involve dietary modifications and/or medications, are essential to alleviate symptoms and prevent long‐term complications. 3 Today, the diagnosis, monitoring, and evaluation of treatments require repeated tissue biopsies of the esophagus. This is particularly challenging for children because they must undergo general anesthesia for an esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD). Thus, there is a great need for less invasive methods to diagnose and monitor EoE in pediatric patients.Numerous efforts have been undertaken to identify a distinctive factor for predicting EoE, primarily focusing on peripheral blood. However, as of today, no specific predictive marker has been found. Eosinophil‐derived neurotoxin (EDN) and absolute eosinophil count (AEC) in peripheral blood are described as important markers in EoE 4 , 5 but they cannot alone distinguish EoE from healthy individuals. 6 Others have suggested an association between elevated levels of specific IgG4 (sIgG4) and EoE 7 , 8 and a recent study depicts that the S enantiomer of 15‐hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid (15(S)‐HETE) is elevated in EoE, 9 adding to the complexity. In addition, several studies lack comparable reference groups with atopic and/or allergic individuals 10 , 11 , 12 making it difficult to predict the disease, as EoE has a high comorbidity with other immune‐driven diseases (e.g., asthma, food allergy and allergic rhinitis 13 ). Also, most studies only compare healthy individuals with active EoE, and do not take into consideration patients that are currently in remission.Given the current lack of knowledge and the need for less invasive methods to diagnose and monitor EoE, we aimed to identify biomarkers associated with EoE in a large and well‐defined cohort of children. The specific aims were (i) to explore whether a panel of biomarkers, combined with symptoms, could distinguish between active EoE, EoE in remission, and healthy individuals, and (ii) to follow changes in biomarkers longitudinally.