BackgroundConverging evidence suggests that markers of Alzheimer's disease (AD) pathology in cognitively unimpaired older individuals are associated with high risk of cognitive decline and progression to functional impairment. The Anti-Amyloid Treatment in Asymptomatic Alzheimer's disease (A4) and Longitudinal Evaluation of Amyloid and Neurodegeneration Risk (LEARN) Studies enrolled a large cohort of cognitively normal older individuals across a range of baseline amyloid PET levels. Recent advances in AD blood-based biomarkers further enable the comparison of baseline markers in the prediction of longitudinal clinical outcomes. IntroductionThe ability to accurately predict risk of cognitive and functional decline prior to symptom onset in Alzheimer's disease (AD) is critical to the identification of individuals who might benefit from very early intervention. Converging evidence from previous observational studies in cognitively unimpaired older individuals suggests that abnormal positron emission tomography (PET) imaging and fluid biomarkers of AD pathology are associated with increased risk of cognitive decline and progression to mild cognitive impairment and dementia (1, 2, 3).The Anti-Amyloid Treatment in Asymptomatic Alzheimer's disease (A4) Study (4) was a Phase 3 clinical trial testing whether solanezumab, a monoclonal antibody against monomeric forms of amyloid-beta, could slow cognitive decline at the stage of asymptomatic or “preclinical” AD (5). Eligible participants were cognitively and functionally unimpaired with evidence of elevated amyloid on screening PET imaging. The Longitudinal Evaluation of Amyloid and Neurodegeneration Risk (LEARN) Study was launched as a companion observational study in a subset of cognitively unimpaired individuals who screen-failed for A4 on the basis of not showing elevated amyloid on screening PET. While the A4 Study did not demonstrate any evidence of clinical benefit of solanezumab treatment or lowering of amyloid PET below baseline levels (4), the A4 Study provides a rich dataset to explore cognitive and functional outcomes in a large, well-characterized cohort of biomarker positive, cognitively unimpaired older individuals (see Jimenez-Maggiora et al. in this special issue).Overall, the elevated amyloid or “amyloid positive” (Aβ +) participants in both A4 treatment arms demonstrated cognitive and functional decline during the 4.5-year double-blind phase, in comparison to the amyloid “negative” (Aβ−) LEARN participants, who remained cognitively stable over the same interval. To follow-up on this initial observation, we sought to evaluate whether the level of amyloid on baseline PET imaging was predictive of longitudinal change in cognitive and functional outcomes during the A4 and LEARN Studies.Since the launch of the A4 Study in 2014, which relied on amyloid PET to determine trial eligibility, there has been remarkable progress in blood-based biomarkers to detect evidence of AD pathology (6). In particular, plasma assays of phosphorylated tau at residue 217 (P-tau217) have emerged as sensitive and reliable indicators of early elevations in brain amyloid (7). More recently, P-tau217 has shown promise in prediction of cognitive decline in observational cohorts (8, 9, 10, 11). Banked plasma from baseline and selected longitudinal visits in both A4 and LEARN enabled measurement of baseline and longitudinal change in P-tau217 using a plasma immunoassay (see Rissman R et al in this special issue).Tau PET imaging became available soon after the launch of the A4 Study and was incorporated into A4 as a substudy at a subset of sites. Tau PET was developed to measure forms of phosphorylated tau aggregated into paired helical filaments in tangles and neurites (12). Tau deposition measured by PET has been hypothesized to be more closely associated with cognitive impairment than amyloid pathology (13, 14).In this study, we sought to evaluate whether baseline levels of AD pathology measured by molecular imaging and blood biomarkers were predictive of cognitive and functional outcomes over the 4.5-year doubleblind phase of A4 and the corresponding time period in the LEARN Study. We assessed models of variance explained to compare the relative utility of amyloid PET, tau PET, and plasma P-tau217 in predicting cognitive decline, including baseline demographics, cognitive and functional measures, and treatment assignment in the model. We assessed these variables across the LEARN and A4 cohorts, with the full range from Aβ− to Aβ+, and across the A4 Study Aβ+ treatment arms to determine whether higher levels of AD pathology at baseline predicted greater cognitive and functional decline in preclinical AD.