1. IntroductionBlood samples are used for diagnostic testing . Apart from conventional electrolyte panels, specific assays are used to detect a wide variety of biomarkers linked to heart disease, bladder disease, lung disease, pancreatic cancer, breast cancer, and diabetic retinopathy . The list of known biomarkers in blood is extensive , and additional novel biomarkers are frequently reported . Other fluids are used for biomarker diagnostic purposes including urine, saliva, and mucosal secretions . Saliva is known to possess proteases that have the capability to degrade some biomarkers. The use of urine biomarkers for prostate cancer detection is influenced by the pH of the urine, which may impact the observed concentrations of several other biomarkers . There have been advances in biomarker detection methods, such as surface plasmon resonance (SPR), 2D chromatography, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), plasmonic nanoparticles, and liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) .Venous blood samples are considered the most efficient approach for identifying biomarkers and conducting blood tests . The procedure of extracting blood samples from a vein can be complicated, mostly linked to the following challenges: (i) access to veins is a complex task that requires the participation of skilled healthcare professionals; (ii) the act of collecting blood samples requires clinical ability and adherence to sterile procedures; (iii) other factors can complicate the findings, such as the patient’s age and weight; and (iv) errors in handling the blood can occur, including clotting, inaccuracies in dilution, and variations in biomarker levels . The factors mentioned above are referred to as pre-analytical variability and are believed to be responsible for approximately 90% of diagnostic errors . These problems are even more difficult for lumbar punctures, which require patient sedation. The collection of blood samples using needles is convenient, but there is a need for improved methods of collecting body fluid samples for diagnostics.Collecting tear fluid is a non-invasive method, and tear samples contain a wide range of biomarkers, potentially including all those found in blood . According to Mitalee et al., there are more than 100 distinct biomarkers that may be found in tear fluid . A limiting factor in using tears is the difficulty of obtaining an unperturbed sample. The total volume of tears for one eye is about 7 μL . Tear samples are commonly acquired by the use of capillary tubes or adsorbent paper strips similar to those used to measure tear output. The samples are sent out to measure electrolyte concentrations or specific biomarker testing . Importantly, the eyes are sensitive and any physical contact results in a rapid physical change in the type of tears produced . Basal tear fluid, reflex tears, and emotional tears each have a different composition of proteins . Because of the small tear volumes available for analysis, the biomarker assays are performed using highly sensitive methods such as ELISA, SPR, fluorescence, electrochemical methods, LC-MS/MS, and nanosensors .Currently, there is a growing trend towards the use of tear fluids for different applications. The identification of biomarkers in tear fluids is a potential alternative to blood-based biomarker detection . Because tears do not contain red blood cells and most other circulating cells are removed from tears, the samples are already partially purified. Tear films consist of numerous components that create a physical barrier against particles, bacteria, and viruses . Tear film, a thin extracellular layer, protects and cleans the eye. It is typically 3–40 µm thick, secretes at a rate of 1.2 µL/min, and has a volume of 5–10 µL . The eye’s tear surface film is made up of three layers: middle aqueous, outer lipid, and inner mucin (Figure 1A). It is composed of water, salts, proteins, lipids, and mucins. The protein makeup of the aqueous layer changes with eye state (open/closed) and tear type (reflex/basal) . Tear films are provided by the constant production of fresh tear fluid by continuous secretions from the lacrimal, Meibomian, and reflex glands. Except for a possible short time delay, the tears are in rapid equilibrium with blood . Tears could be used for biomarker detection if appropriate technology is made available for the samples. The processing of the tear samples for such measurements is time consuming and requires sophisticated apparatus . Consequently, such measurements are not currently applicable for point-of-care applications.Contact lenses (CLs) have many beneficial characteristics for biosensing applications . In addition, CLs establish direct touch with ocular tears and the corneal epithelium. CLs are considered a minimally invasive technologies; are small, light, inexpensive, and portable; and may include a variety of sensors . The close connection of the many components of the eye and CLs made it possible to develop lenses that can serve as continuous monitoring platforms. Recent studies demonstrated a correlation between glucose levels in tears and blood glucose level with a delay of 10–20 min. In recent times, multicolor nanozyme-infused cosmetic CLs have been produced to prevent ocular surface diseases. This is accomplished by incorporating Prussian blue nanoparticles into the lens matrix, allowing the catalytic scavenging of reactive oxygen species . Also, a hemispherical system with Ti3C2Tx MXene has been used for intraocular pressure monitoring. This method combines a micro-supercapacitor (MSC) with strain sensors to produce self-supporting devices . The two types of sensor-integrated CLs have high sensitivity, despite the fact that they need several fabrication procedures.Multiple groups have worked on embedding sensors into contact lenses. Google attempted to make a glucose-sensitive contact lens using embedded electronics . This lens used the standard approach with glucose oxidase, electrochemical detection, and radio frequency induction for power (Figure S1). The GlucoLens was announced in 2014 with participation by Novartis, Alphabet, and other companies . The GlucoLens project was dropped in November 2018. Another example is Mojo Vision, Inc., which started work on a more advanced smart contact lens in July 2017 and, by July 2022, had support from 32 companies . The Mojo lens was promised to display augmented reality to the wearers. This project was abandoned in January 2023, but Mojo announced new funding to make smart contact lenses . Other companies have developed contact lenses to detect glaucoma or for image display (Figure S1). However, all of these methods require embedding components into the lenses. Few, if any, of these projects resulted in a final product. These commercial and private efforts demonstrate the difficulty of placing the needed electronics or photonic components within a contact lens. If one of these electronic lenses was successful and designed for long-term wear, the components would need to be embedded in a wide variety of contact lens polymers for different patients.Our approach to making a sensing or biomarker contact lens (BM-CL) is very different from previous efforts. We do not place any electronics or specialized optical components within the lens (Figure S2). The only active components in our BM-CL are fluorescent proteins bound to the contact lens. This approach can be used with most contact lenses in current use, but our experiments found the silicone hydrogel (SiHG) lenses to be most suitable and SiHG lenses are widely used and acceptable to most patients . The extensive publication library on binding proteins to surfaces can be used in the fabrication of these lenses. Biomarker identification is facilitated by the increasing number of recombinant mono-cloned antibodies that have been developed by industry and private laboratories . Our approach to surface-labeled contact lenses allows applications beyond biomarkers and extends to most of the electrolytes in tears and glucose . Our unique approach also allows separate measurements on each side of a contact lens, the pre-lens tear film (PLTF) and the post-lens tear film (PoLTF) , which may allow selective observation of ocular surface diseases on sensitive epithelia corneal cells. In this work, we developed a fluorescent immunoassay for the detection of lysozyme (Lys) on the surfaces of CLs. Notably, Lys is an antibacterial enzyme found in different bodily fluids, including tears and saliva. Lys in tears is essential for protecting the eyes from bacterial infections. The physiological concentration of Lys in tears is around 1.33 mg/mL, with some studies suggesting a range of 1.4 to 2.1 mg/mL . Consequently, the detection of Lys is straightforward due to its higher content in tears. CLs underwent the first Lys coating procedure. To measure fluorescence, a fluorescence immunoassay was established for the lenses, which examined Lys uptake and the interaction of primary and secondary antibodies on the lens surface. It is expected that BM-CLs will ultimately serve as a specific coating or antibody conjugation designed to target and identify a wide range of biomarkers.