MethodsStudy design, setting, and populationThis analysis was conducted in line with a large prospective cohort study. Three groups of patients were selected out of 120 patients recruited in line with the TORADI-HIT data set16,26 or a preceding pilot study:11,27 (1) confirmed HIT; (2) H/PF4 antibodies present but HIT ruled out; and (3) HIT ruled out, H/PF4 antibodies not present (Figure 1; primary data set). Patients in each group were randomly selected. An additional, random sample of 50 patients was selected to confirm the findings in a second data set. Overall inclusion criteria were as follows: (1) suspected HIT, which included anti-H/PF4 antibody assay ordered or 4Ts score rated or hematology consultancy service requested; (2) age ≥18 years; and (3) general informed consent. Exclusion criteria were (1) insufficient serum specimen, (2) insufficient clinical data, and (3) did not pass Olink quality control. The TORADI-HIT study recruited patients from 11 study centers in Switzerland, Germany, and the United States.16 Most patients were included in Inselspital, University Hospital of Bern, Bern, Switzerland. Biomarker discovery was done using Olink PEA (356 different proteins). The results were verified using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) determinations of the proteins (at French Blood Establishment [EFS] Auvergne-Rhone-Alpes, and University Jean Monnet, Mines Saint-Etienne, and INSERM, U 1059 SAINBIOSE laboratory).Figure 1.Flowchart of the patients (primary and second data sets).Definition of patient groupsHIT was defined by a positive washed platelet functional assay, specifically the heparin-induced platelet activation assay (HIPA).11,16,27 Multiple studies have demonstrated that washed platelet assays, such as the serotonin release assay and HIPA, exhibit high sensitivity and specificity, and strong concordance with clinical HIT. Therefore, the American Society of Hematology and the British Committee for Standards in Hematology recommend these assays as reference standards.28,29 Patients with positive H/PF4 antibodies were defined by a positive immunoassay (ELISA) but a negative HIPA. Patients with negative HIT were defined by a negative ELISA and a negative HIPA.Workup and laboratory testsDetailed clinical and laboratory data including residual serum samples were collected at diagnosis following a prespecified protocol. Serum samples were frozen at –80°C. HIPA and H/PF4 immunoassays were conducted within 1 week after arrival. The laboratory technicians were blinded to the results of the other test and to the clinical information.For the HIPA, serum samples were incubated with 4 different washed platelet donations in the presence of (1) only buffer, (2) 0.2 IU/mL low molecular weight heparin, and (3) 100 IU/mL heparin. All details were published previously.11,16,30 The test was considered positive if aggregation occurred within 30 minutes for at least 2 donors in the presence of 0.2 IU/mL low molecular weight heparin but not in the presence of 100 IU/mL heparin. On each plate, positive and negative controls were also measured.For the H/PF4 immunoassay, the polyspecific Lifecodes PF4 Enhanced (Immucor, Dreieich, Germany) was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Optical density >0.5 was considered positive. The test was previously validated in our laboratory, and external and internal quality controls were performed.11Proteomic profilingTo assess the proteomic profile, 4 existing panels of Olink (Olink Proteomics Inc, Uppsala, Sweden) PEA were performed by Olink Uppsala: “Cardiovascular II,” “Cardiovascular III,” “Immune response,” and “Inflammation.” These panels include 356 different proteins involved in thrombus formation and inflammation. A full list of all proteins can be found in supplemental Table 3. In short, the PEA recognizes proteins by pairs of oligonucleotide-linked antibodies.21 If the antibodies bind in proximity to each other, the oligonucleotides hybridize, and a new polymerase chain reaction primer sequence is revealed. This DNA barcode is then amplified and detected via quantitative polymerase chain reaction. The cycle threshold value, which is inversely correlated to the protein concentration in the sample, is then normalized and transformed to an arbitrary unit called normalized protein expression on a log 2 scale. The quality of the measurements is assured through multiple internal controls (incubation controls, extension controls, and detection controls) as well as sample controls (interplate and negative controls), details of which are described elsewhere.31 This innovative technique has been successfully used to identify various key biomarkers in a broad range of diseases, including venous thromboembolism.22, 23, 24, 25,32 The proteins were then annotated with their corresponding gene using the Human Protein Atlas project.33P-selectin ELISA technologyThe levels of soluble P-selectin (soluble CD62P; corresponding to SELP; minimum detectable concentration, 0.244 ng/mL) were quantified in serum samples using ELISA (IBL International, Hamburg, Germany). Absorbance at 450 nm (for serotonin, 405 nm) was measured using an ELISA plate reader (Magellan Software; SUNRISE TIME, Tecan Group Ltd, Lyon, France). Results were normalized to 2 × 108 platelets per mL, and data were expressed in pg/mL.34Statistical analysisTo explore the variability between different patient groups, a principal component analysis (PCA) using single value decomposition and sparse least square analysis (sPLS) was used. Additionally, to quantify the association between protein levels and the presence of HIT, we fitted a linear model to the data using the “stats” package for R. In the model, the normalized protein expression value of the different proteins served as the dependent variable, whereas the HIPA status was used as the independent variable. To account for physiological differences among patients, the model was adjusted for age and sex. The Benjamini-Hochberg method was used to adjust the calculated P value to account for multiple testing, setting the false discovery rate at 5%. A heat map showing the 50 most significantly changed proteins and a volcano plot were plotted. For the biomarker that showed the highest significance, we created box plots by thrombosis status and compared the different groups using the Wilcoxon rank-sum test. Finally, to determine the diagnostic usefulness of the biomarker, we performed a receiver-operator characteristic curve (ROC) analysis and calculated the area under the curve (ROC-AUC). Additionally, we performed a multivariable linear regression and ROC analysis using thrombosis as the dependent variable. All analyses were done in R version 4.1.2.The appropriate ethical committee approved the final protocol (Kantonale Ethikkommission Bern). The study was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. Study design, setting, and populationThis analysis was conducted in line with a large prospective cohort study. Three groups of patients were selected out of 120 patients recruited in line with the TORADI-HIT data set16,26 or a preceding pilot study:11,27 (1) confirmed HIT; (2) H/PF4 antibodies present but HIT ruled out; and (3) HIT ruled out, H/PF4 antibodies not present (Figure 1; primary data set). Patients in each group were randomly selected. An additional, random sample of 50 patients was selected to confirm the findings in a second data set. Overall inclusion criteria were as follows: (1) suspected HIT, which included anti-H/PF4 antibody assay ordered or 4Ts score rated or hematology consultancy service requested; (2) age ≥18 years; and (3) general informed consent. Exclusion criteria were (1) insufficient serum specimen, (2) insufficient clinical data, and (3) did not pass Olink quality control. The TORADI-HIT study recruited patients from 11 study centers in Switzerland, Germany, and the United States.16 Most patients were included in Inselspital, University Hospital of Bern, Bern, Switzerland. Biomarker discovery was done using Olink PEA (356 different proteins). The results were verified using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) determinations of the proteins (at French Blood Establishment [EFS] Auvergne-Rhone-Alpes, and University Jean Monnet, Mines Saint-Etienne, and INSERM, U 1059 SAINBIOSE laboratory).Figure 1.Flowchart of the patients (primary and second data sets). Statistical analysisTo explore the variability between different patient groups, a principal component analysis (PCA) using single value decomposition and sparse least square analysis (sPLS) was used. Additionally, to quantify the association between protein levels and the presence of HIT, we fitted a linear model to the data using the “stats” package for R. In the model, the normalized protein expression value of the different proteins served as the dependent variable, whereas the HIPA status was used as the independent variable. To account for physiological differences among patients, the model was adjusted for age and sex. The Benjamini-Hochberg method was used to adjust the calculated P value to account for multiple testing, setting the false discovery rate at 5%. A heat map showing the 50 most significantly changed proteins and a volcano plot were plotted. For the biomarker that showed the highest significance, we created box plots by thrombosis status and compared the different groups using the Wilcoxon rank-sum test. Finally, to determine the diagnostic usefulness of the biomarker, we performed a receiver-operator characteristic curve (ROC) analysis and calculated the area under the curve (ROC-AUC). Additionally, we performed a multivariable linear regression and ROC analysis using thrombosis as the dependent variable. All analyses were done in R version 4.1.2.The appropriate ethical committee approved the final protocol (Kantonale Ethikkommission Bern). The study was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. Supplementary Material Supplemental Figures and Tables