IntroductionThyroid hormones (THs) are involved in the regulation of metabolic processes, growth and development. In addition to their well-documented biological functions, thyroid hormones are involved in carcinogenesis and cancer progression. A considerable number of population-based studies have indicated a correlation between thyroid hormone levels and the incidence or progression of different types of cancer. In vivo and in vitro studies have demonstrated that triiodothyronine (T3) and thyroxine (T4) are involved in the proliferation, apoptosis, invasion and angiogenesis of cancer cells.A two-sample Mendelian randomization study revealed a causal relationship between hypothyroidism and gastric cancer, suggesting that hypothyroidism may be associated with a reduced risk of gastric cancer . Hyperthyroidism is associated with an increased risk of breast cancer, and the elevated risk of breast cancer caused by hyperthyroidism is more pronounced in postmenopausal women . Orthotopically inoculated breast cancer cells exhibit accelerated growth and immune microenvironment suppression in hyperthyroid mice. In contrast, hypothyroid model mice exhibit delayed tumor growth, increased infiltration of activated CD8 + T cells, and elevated IFNγ/IL-10 ratios . Liu et al. demonstrated that hypothyroidism was causally associated with a reduced likelihood of developing lung cancer, specifically lung squamous cell carcinoma, by employing a Mendelian randomization approach .These studies indicate that abnormalities in thyroid function are significantly correlated with the risk and pattern of development of various types of cancer. Additionally, individual hormones have been identified as potentially influencing different types of cancer. Studies have reported that in postmenopausal women diagnosed with sigmoid colon cancer and colorectal cancer who are exposed to dietary zearalenone, as well as in males with hyperandrogenism, higher fT3/fT4 ratios are associated with poorer prognosis. Furthermore, regardless of the patient's sex, the greater the distance of the colonic tumor lesion is, the greater the fT3/fT4 ratio . Studies have indicated that T3 can promote the efflux of chemotherapeutic drugs from cancer cells, thereby reducing the efficacy of chemotherapy and enabling cancer cells to evade treatment . Elevated free thyroxine (FT4) levels have been shown to be associated with an increased risk of breast cancer, particularly estrogen receptor-positive tumors, highlighting its potential procarcinogenic role . In a retrospective study of TH and lung cancer, researchers reported that serum thyrotrophin (TSH), TT3, and serum free triiodothyronine (FT3) levels were significantly lower, whereas serum FT4 levels were elevated in lung cancer patients compared with healthy individuals . Nevertheless, the correlation between TH and cancer has been similarly demonstrated in numerous other diseases, including hepatocellular carcinoma , prostate cancer  and melanoma .Bladder cancer (BC) is the tenth most common cause of cancer and the thirteenth most common cause of mortality from cancer . Urothelial cancer accounts for approximately 95% of BCs  and is categorized as non-muscle invasive bladder cancer (NMIBC) or muscle invasive bladder cancer (MIBC). NMIBC is generally associated with a favourable prognosis, although it has a high recurrence rate, with 21% of cases potentially progressing to MIBC . Early and effective management of NMIBC can prevent its progression to MIBC, significantly improving long-term outcomes. The treatment of NMIBC typically involves transurethral resection and intravesical therapy. In contrast, MIBC, which has a poorer prognosis and greater risk of metastasis, often requires radical cystectomy, systemic chemotherapy, and, in some cases, radiation therapy. The optimal approach to improve the management of bladder cancer is to implement early intervention and aggressive treatment of NMIBC, with the aim of preventing its progression to MIBC. This approach has the potential to reduce mortality and improve patient quality of life . Nevertheless, the relationships between TH and BC or BC stages have not yet been elucidated. Consequently, it is crucial to identify biomarkers that can assist in the diagnosis of BC and to determine the stage and prognosis of BC. Consequently, the current study sought to assess the associations of bladder cancer and different cancer stages with TH levels.