MethodsFive males with classical Fabry disease were treated. Their HSPCs were mobilized, enriched, and transduced with a recombinant lentivirus engineering expression of α‐gal A. Autologous transduced cells were infused after conditioning with a nonmyeloablative, reduced dose, melphalan regimen. Safety monitoring was performed. α‐Gal A activity was measured in plasma and peripheral blood (PB) leucocytes. Globotriaosylceramide (Gb3) and lyso‐Gb3 levels in urine and plasma were assessed by mass spectrometry. qPCR assays measured vector copy number in PB leucocytes. Antibody titers were measured by ELISA. Body weight, blood pressure, urinary protein levels, eGFR, troponin levels, and LVMI were tracked. 4MATERIALS AND METHODS4.1PatientsMale Fabry disease patients were recruited to this multiple‐centre, single‐arm Phase 1 clinical trial from Calgary, AB; Halifax, NS; and Toronto, ON, from September 2016 to October 2018. Subjects were screened and provided written informed consent prior to recruitment to this study. Recruitment was restricted to men (age 18–50) with confirmed Type 1 classical phenotype Fabry disease confirmed by GLA genotyping who had received ET for at least 6 months prior to study enrolment. Inclusion criteria comprised an eGFR, >45 mL/min/1.73 m2 (chronic kidney disease epidemiology collaboration equation [CKD‐EPI]) and left ventricular ejection fraction >45%. Patients with advanced Fabry disease were excluded. Additional eligibility criteria were previously reported. 11 Ozmosis Research, Inc. (Toronto, ON) assigned a unique study identifier to each patient and all patients consented to the release of de‐identified data.4.2Lentiviral vectorThe LV‐AGA vector was described previously. 15 Large‐scale, high‐titre, clinical‐grade, recombinant LV was manufactured, purified and qualified by the Indiana University Vector Production Facility, Indianapolis, IN.4.3Study designThree regional haematopoietic stem cell centres (Calgary, AB; Toronto, ON; and Halifax, NS) participated in Fabry patient recruitment. All steps including mobilisation, apheresis, transduction, conditioning and transplantation were described in our earlier report. 11 Briefly, two patients received filgrastim (16 µg/kg) only while three patients were administered filgrastim (16 µg/kg) and plerixafor (240 µg/kg) for stem cell mobilisation. A back‐up graft of at least 2.5 × 106 unmanipulated CD34+ cells/kg was harvested from each patient for use in the event of graft failure. After apheresis, the nucleated haematopoietic cells were transported to the Juravinski Cancer Centre, Hamilton, ON, for CD34+ cell enrichment. Selected cells were then transported to the Orsino Cell Processing Laboratory, Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, Toronto, ON, for LV transduction. The transduction protocol was described in detail. 15 After cryopreservation and safety/sterility testing, and an approved Certificate of Analysis from Health Canada, the drug product was transported back to the stem cell centre of origin. Patients received melphalan (100 mg/m2) intravenously 1 day prior to autologous drug product infusion. After we observed prolonged α‐gal A activity in both leukocytes and plasma of Patient 1, the protocol was amended to allow patients to discontinue ET after an appropriate consultation/consent procedure. Patient 1 was not able to attend the follow‐up by calendar date of 5 years due to COVID restrictions and attended at 5.5 years after an amendment to include these data were filed.4.4ET pauseET pause was considered in patients that were medically stable 6–18 months post‐transplant. This included stable production of α‐gal A enzyme levels, stability of plasma and urine Gb3 and lyso‐Gb3 metabolite levels and stable characterisation of patient health status with particular emphasis on renal, cardiac and neurologic investigations. To be a candidate to cease ET, each patient was required to synthesise α‐gal A at a level deemed acceptable by the investigator, be medically stable, and provide written consent for withdrawal of ET following a discussion with their study physician. Finally, the Clinical Trials Steering Committee unanimously agreed and provided written approval that ET could be stopped for the patient after review of all relevant data and literature and evaluation of the risks versus benefits to each patient.4.5Safety and functional efficacy assessmentsThe National Cancer Institute Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events version 4.03 was used to report AEs and SAEs. Analysis of drug product efficacy included the analysis of plasma and leukocyte α‐gal A activity 15 , 48 , 49 ; detection of Gb3 and lyso‐Gb3 from plasma and urine by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) 12 , 50 , 51 , 52 ; presence and persistence of LV marked cells in peripheral blood 15 ; anti‐α‐gal IgG antibody levels measured by enzyme‐linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA; modified from Lee et al.) 53 ; clinical outcomes; and detection of VCN. All peripheral blood enzyme activities were measured in the trough period more than 10 days after ET administration and during the 60 days bracketing the infusion of transduced cells when ET was stopped. Plasma α‐gal A activity and leukocyte α‐gal A‐specific activity reference ranges were defined by London Health Sciences Centre Clinical Biochemical Genetics Laboratory (headed by Dr. Rupar) based on 150 specimens referred for diagnostic testing. No additional bone marrow samples were drawn beyond 1 month post‐transplant, as per protocol. Cardiac echocardiograms and magnetic resonance imaging was performed as described in ref. 54 Reference ranges for some clinical parameters varied between study sites. The reference ranges selected for presentation were selected from the Calgary site since three of five patients were recruited there and at the end of the trial four patients were being followed at this location.4.6Study oversightThe clinical trial (NCT02800070, Health Canada—approved 26 April, 2016) was conducted in compliance with the Declaration of Helsinki and local institutional and/or university Human Experimentation Committee requirements. Research Ethics Board (REB) approval was provided by all local sites (described below). This study was designed by the FACTs team. Ozmosis Research, Inc., of Toronto, Canada performed clinical trial management. Clinical data were collected by the investigators of the FACTs team who were responsible for clinical assessments during Phases 3 (treatment phase) and 4 (long‐term follow‐up). Clinical and laboratory data were reviewed monthly by the FACTs team. Clinical decisions and safety monitoring for each patient were completed by a Clinical Trial Steering Committee (CTSC) of the FACTs team. A Data Monitoring Safety Committee (DSMC) reviewed clinical and safety data after the treatment phase for Patients 1 and 3. 4.3Study designThree regional haematopoietic stem cell centres (Calgary, AB; Toronto, ON; and Halifax, NS) participated in Fabry patient recruitment. All steps including mobilisation, apheresis, transduction, conditioning and transplantation were described in our earlier report. 11 Briefly, two patients received filgrastim (16 µg/kg) only while three patients were administered filgrastim (16 µg/kg) and plerixafor (240 µg/kg) for stem cell mobilisation. A back‐up graft of at least 2.5 × 106 unmanipulated CD34+ cells/kg was harvested from each patient for use in the event of graft failure. After apheresis, the nucleated haematopoietic cells were transported to the Juravinski Cancer Centre, Hamilton, ON, for CD34+ cell enrichment. Selected cells were then transported to the Orsino Cell Processing Laboratory, Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, Toronto, ON, for LV transduction. The transduction protocol was described in detail. 15 After cryopreservation and safety/sterility testing, and an approved Certificate of Analysis from Health Canada, the drug product was transported back to the stem cell centre of origin. Patients received melphalan (100 mg/m2) intravenously 1 day prior to autologous drug product infusion. After we observed prolonged α‐gal A activity in both leukocytes and plasma of Patient 1, the protocol was amended to allow patients to discontinue ET after an appropriate consultation/consent procedure. Patient 1 was not able to attend the follow‐up by calendar date of 5 years due to COVID restrictions and attended at 5.5 years after an amendment to include these data were filed.