DISCUSSIONThe new Pitt‐p‐tau217 assay exhibits high and reproducible classification accuracies for identifying individuals with biological evidence of Alzheimer's disease, equivalent to the widely used ALZpath‐p‐tau217. 4DISCUSSIONIn this study, we have addressed a critical shortcoming in the literature regarding plasma p‐tau217; namely if p‐tau217 assays built using the same ultrasensitive technology but different antibodies result in similar performances. We achieved this by developing the novel plasma Pitt‐p‐tau217 assay using a new rabbit mAb that is distinct from the single mouse mAb from ALZpath used in most p‐tau217 immunoassays available. Our results demonstrate that the Pitt‐p‐tau217 assay signal in human plasma was elevated in ante mortem samples from autopsy‐verified sporadic AD and ADAD individuals. Moreover, the assay showed high accuracies in separating Aβ+ and Aβ– individuals across two cohorts including mostly cognitively normal older participants, as well as moderate accuracies in distinguishing tau PET–positive and –negative individuals. Importantly, these results were strongly correlated with those obtained with the ALZpath p‐tau217 assay, which uses the ALZpath antibody widely applied in most p‐tau217 assays to date. These findings establish the utility of the Pitt‐p‐tau217 and underscores that p‐tau217–specific assays established using Simoa technology can be highly accurate irrespective of if a commonly used antibody is used or if a novel antibody is applied.With the exception of the Lumipulse and Janssen p‐tau217 assays 35 , 36 that use different antibodies but account for a relatively small proportion of studies on p‐tau217, all other research use only (RUO) and in vitro diagnostic immunoassay methods on p‐tau217 currently use the ALZpath antibody. Hence, the literature is heavily skewed toward data obtained using this antibody, making it difficult to explain if the stellar performance of p‐tau217 is either antibody dependent or simply due to p‐tau217 being an excellent biomarker. Our results support the latter conclusion, showing that novel p‐tau217 antibodies can be used to develop high–performance immunoassays. We chose to compare the Pittsburgh and ALZpath p‐tau217 assays as like‐for‐like methods in the sense that: (1) they both use Simoa technology; (2) both assays use monoclonal antibodies that bind p‐tau217 specifically without cross‐reactivity to neighboring phosphorylation sites, as seen with the Janssen p‐tau217+ assay for example; and (3) they both partner their p‐tau217 antibody with an N‐terminal phosphorylation‐independent detection antibody.The biochemical characterization of the novel p‐tau217 antibody demonstrated high specificity to the p‐tau217 site, even in the presence of phosphorylation at neighboring sites. In our immunohistochemistry study, the p‐tau217 immunoreactivity observed in sections of the middle temporal gyrus and in the hippocampus from advanced‐stage AD brains identified morphologically diverse NFTs from pre‐tangles to mature tangles, as seen in previous reports using p‐tau217 and several other antibodies targeting tau phosphorylation at threonine epitopes. 37 , 38 , 39 , 40 In agreement with these studies, our results show that the p‐tau217 antibody used in the current report identifies the full range of neurofibrillary pathology types including tangles, dystrophic neurites in neuritic plaques, and neuropil threads, further supporting the use of this antibody to detect tau pathology characteristic of AD that may be the source of the p‐tau217 containing tau assayed in biological fluids. The robust immunostaining of dystrophic neurites in neuritic plaques may explain good correlation between plasma levels of p‐tau217 and amyloid pathology detectable with PET, as noted in the current study and several other reports. 38 , 41 The Pitt‐p‐tau217 assay expands the repertoire of plasma p‐tau217 immunoassay methods available on the market, particularly those from academic laboratories. At present, only a single blood‐based p‐tau217 immunoassay has been reported from an academic center 42 with the rest all from commercial sources. RUO assays built from academic labs tend to be cheaper to implement, and amenable to experimental changes that can be performed to accelerate research inquiry without concerns about infringing on commercially driven intellectual properties. At a time when research funding is difficult to come by, having an in‐house assay that will allow scientists to perform highly reliable p‐tau217 testing at a fraction of the current costs should be advantageous. We estimate that the Pitts‐p‐tau217 assay costs one third of the ALZpath p‐tau217 method, confirming its cost effectiveness. The strong correlations of the Pittsburgh and ALZpath p‐tau217 assays show that they can both be used perhaps interchangeably to assess the pathophysiology of AD, without compromising on assay quality and classification accuracies.Strengths of this study include the new p‐tau217 antibody biochemical characterization, assay development, analytical, and clinical validation. Moreover, clinical validation studies were performed in multiple cohorts including in one with matched ante mortem plasma and post mortem neuropathological diagnosis, and others from population‐based sources. Assay performance was also compared to that of an established one, that is, the ALZpath assay.In conclusion, this study reports the biochemical characterization of a novel p‐tau217 antibody and its use in developing an innovative Pitt‐p‐tau217 assay. This assay demonstrated equivalent performance with the widely used ALZpath p‐tau217 immunoassay, which shares a similar design and is measured on the same Quanterix Simoa analytical platform as the new method. The Pitt‐p‐tau217 assay is an accurate sensitive, cost‐effective and accessible research tool to investigating AD pathophysiology in research settings.