2METHODS2.1Patient characteristics and sample collectionThis study is part of a single‐center study on the longitudinal detection and analysis of CTCs in mBC patients. All patients treated for mBC between January 2017 and March 2024 at the Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, University Hospital Ulm, were eligible for inclusion at the start of a new therapy, regardless of tumor biology and prior treatment. Further details of patient selection and sample collection as well as processing including PE samples are described in Önder et al. 16 and in the Data S1 (methods section).For ethics see Ethics Statement below.2.2Cell culture and treatment, CTC enrichment and enumeration by CellSearch® technologyCell lines were cultivated as described in Schochter et al. 17 (Data S1). The CTC enumeration and enrichment was performed as described in Schochter et al. 17 The fourth channel was used for 53BP1 detection, and the 53BP1 score was calculated as described.2.3 EDTA blood sample processing and mass cytometryTwo 7.5 mL EDTA blood samples were used for the isolation of cfDNA from plasma and PBMCs, together with CTCs. Frozen cells were thawed and then stained with the antibody panel shown in Tables S2 and S3. The samples were then analyzed using a Helios™ mass cytometer. Further details for isolation, staining, and data acquisition can be found in Data S1 (methods section).2.4Immunofluorescence microscopyMCF‐7/182R‐6 and MDA‐MB‐436 cells were treated for 24 h with 10 μM Olaparib and stained with antibodies against γH2AX, RAD51, 53BP1, pRPA32, Cyclin A, EpCAM, Cytokeratin, and Vimentin as specified in Data S1 (methods section).2.5Cell‐free DNA isolation, shallow WGS library preparation, and sequencingcfDNA was isolated from 2 mL plasma, retrieved from EDTA tubes of the same blood draw as the CellSave® tube used for CTC analysis and stored at −80°C. For cfDNA isolation, the QIAamp MinElute ccfDNA Mini Kit (50) (Qiagen, Venlo, Netherlands) was used according to the manufacturer's protocol. The cfDNA was then stored at −20°C.Shallow WGS (sWGS) libraries were prepared with 10 ng of cfDNA using the plasma‐seq method as described. 18 DNA quantity was determined using the Qubit™ dsDNA High Sensitivity Kit (Invitrogen, ThermoFisher Scientific, USA). Shotgun libraries were prepared with the TruSeq DNA Nano Sample Preparation Kit (Illumina, San Diego, CA). Final libraries were quantified and pooled equimolarly using the Qubit™ dsDNA High Sensitivity Kit and quality checked with the Agilent DNA 7500 kits (Agilent, Santa Clara). Pooled libraries were quantified via qPCR with the StepOne Real‐Time PCR System (Invitrogen, ThermoFisher Scientific, USA). Sixty libraries were pooled equimolarly and sequenced on an SP flow cell on a Novaseq 6000 system (Illumina, San Diego, CA) resulting in a ∼0.1–0.2× coverage per sample. The loading concentration was 1.1 nM and the samples were sequenced Paired End (PE 2x150bp).The sequencing coverage and quality statistics for each sample are summarized in Table S7.2.6 cfDNA data analysis, TF and HRD score estimationThe Illumina® Novaseq 6000 system provides the user with basecall files. Demultiplexing was performed on the Illumina® Dragen server after the run was finished. FASTQ files were trimmed using trimmomatic and quality checked with fastqc. Alignment was performed using the BWA‐MEM (version 0.7.9a‐r786) on the reference genome hg19/GRCh37.The TF of each sample was determined using the ichorCNA pipeline. 19 HRD scoring of PE samples was performed based on Telli et al. 20 and as detailed in the Data S1 (methods section).HRD scoring of the cfDNA from plasma was performed based on Eeckhoutte et al. 21 2.6 cfDNA data analysis, TF and HRD score estimationThe Illumina® Novaseq 6000 system provides the user with basecall files. Demultiplexing was performed on the Illumina® Dragen server after the run was finished. FASTQ files were trimmed using trimmomatic and quality checked with fastqc. Alignment was performed using the BWA‐MEM (version 0.7.9a‐r786) on the reference genome hg19/GRCh37.The TF of each sample was determined using the ichorCNA pipeline. 19 HRD scoring of PE samples was performed based on Telli et al. 20 and as detailed in the Data S1 (methods section).HRD scoring of the cfDNA from plasma was performed based on Eeckhoutte et al. 21