ConclusionOur method significantly enhances detection sensitivity, as compared to measured in parallel QLISAs in a 96 well plate format, enables multiplexing and may prove very valuable for samples of limited volumes. DiscussionPreviously published data on QLISA application for single or multiplex biomarker analysis detect analytes of interest in standard 96-well plates or cuvettes at 50–100 µL sample volumes.12,22–24 Our study aimed to optimize the sensitivity of QLISA and to reduce sample volume through the application of the newly developed microvolumeric (2 µL) analysis format.The transfer of the 96-well bottom-linked immune complexes to a liquid phase was performed using an immune-complex disassembling alkaline solution. After 17 h of incubation, the fluorescence of the QD565 in the disassembling buffer remained relatively strong compared to other buffers used. The proposed alkaline solution for disassembling immune complexes might be also applied in the future for detection of QDs conjugated to analytes on other surfaces and/or detection systems, for instance, glass, nanoparticle or magnetic bead (MB) – bound immune complexes. For instance, the application of 8 different separation buffers (pH ranging from 7 to 11) for dissociation of QD-antibody complexes from MB has been previously reported, suggesting that the alkaline detachment buffers are the most suitable for QDs quantification in MB-based QLISA, as the lower pH acidic solutions cause QDs dissolution.25 Although the mechanism is not completely clear, one of the explanations could be the higher stability of QDs in the basic pH. Basic solutions are used for other SPR experiments to detach antibody complexes from sensors.20 The next step for this new method is the transfer of solid-phase immune complexes to a liquid-phase and microvolume format. Dilution of the detached immune complex with a buffer or diluent appears to be a very important step for round-shaped low viscosity drop formation on a glass microslide for further QDs spectroscopy measurements. Stronger QD FL signal was determined in borate saline buffer as compared to PBS, see Figure 1. Although the QDs signal is slightly reduced by the dilution with PBS, this step is necessary to avoid foaming and to ensure the formation of a liquid interface between two glass surfaces.Low sample and assay reagent volume are also big advantages of this QLISA format. Cuvette or 96-well plate-based measurement formats require a higher sample volume, at least 50–100 μL/well. For the method proposed hereby, the sample and the whole assay volume can be as low as sufficient to cover the bottom of a well in a 96-well plate, ie, 12 μL. Furthermore, FL measurement on a reusable glass slide requires 2 μL of the sample, allowing the application of the 2 μL samples in triplicates which further ensures better accuracy of the measured data.Originally, such spectrophotometric measurement on a reusable glass slide was used for quantitative DNA, RNA or protein detection, but the application of the same methodology to detect QDs FL increases the sensitivity and reduces nonspecific FL, which is a major drawback of plastic ware. Additionally, the same glass slide can be used numerous times, as the sample droplets are wiped out from the glass surface after the MFI measurement.The potential of QDs has been investigated for multiplexed biological imaging4 and toxin analysis in a single well of a microtiter plate.26 Due to wide excitation spectra, it is possible to simultaneously excite QDs of various sizes at a single wavelength and determine emission at a variety of wavelengths. This capability significantly enhances the efficiency and throughput of QD application for multiplexed biomarker analysis. QDs FL spectral analysis revealed that the detection limits of different QDs range between 50 fM (QD625) and 2 pM (QD525). Additionally, the narrow emission spectra of individual QDs ensures very little spectral overlap. Therefore, our proposed method of analysis, comprising the use of immune complex disassembling solution and transferring samples to microvolume reading format (2 µL on glass slides) can be used not only for single analyte detection (singleplex) but also for quantification of two or more analytes (multiplex) in the same well, using different wavelength QDs.For the potential triplexed detection in a spectral range of 525–705 nm, five different combinations were identified. For multiplexed detection of 4 analytes, to minimize overlapping of FL spectra, additional QD with an emission peak at around 800 nm should be used. For demonstration of the multiplexing strategy different QDs coupled with antibodies against COMP and hGH served as duplex detection probes separate analytes. In the 96-well plate, different analyte concentrations can be hardly distinguishable, but the transfer to micro-volumetric detection highly increased the signal strength and sensitivity, revealing the differences in analyte concentrations. Thus, the simultaneous sensitive detection of COMP and hGH antigens according to green and red FL intensity of QDs in the same sample was possible only in microslide format. These data demonstrate that our proposed analytical method of QLISA enables not only single analyte detection (singleplex) but also the quantification of two or more analytes (multiplex) within the same well. ConclusionThe sensitivity of QLISA can be amplified by transferring the well bottom-linked immune complexes to a liquid phase, using an immune-complex disassembling solution, followed by dilution with PBS and analysis in a microvolume format. Although demonstration of our technology primarily focused on COMP and hGH, this in vitro QDs microvolume detection protocol holds promise for FL spectrophotometry registration of multiplexed biomarkers simultaneously. The FL signal readouts from QDs in the microvolume format were 10 to 40 times stronger than those from a standard QLISA in 96-well plate.Notably, this method ensures reduction in sample size and assay reagent volume, it is suitable for FL spectrophotometry, while the microvolume format facilitates a cost-effective measurement of analytes. Taken together, our method significantly enhances detection sensitivity of QLISA, and enables multiplexing of analytes in samples of limited volumes.