DesignAll participants underwent baseline amyloid PET scan, plasma P-tau217; longitudinal cognitive testing with the Primary Alzheimer Cognitive Composite (PACC) every 6 months; and annual functional assessments with the clinical dementia rating (CDR), cognitive functional index (CFI), and activities of daily living (ADL) scales. Baseline tau PET scans were obtained in a subset of participants. Participants with elevated amyloid (Aβ+) on screening PET who met inclusion/exclusion criteria were randomized to receive placebo or solanezumab in a double-blind phase of the A4 Study over 240+ weeks. Participants who did not have elevated amyloid (Aβ−) but were otherwise eligible for the A4 Study were referred to the companion observational LEARN Study with the same outcome assessments over 240+ weeks. ParticipantsOlder participants (ages 65–85) who were cognitively unimpaired at baseline (CDR-GS=0, MMSE 25–30 with educational adjustment, and Logical Memory scores within the normal range LMIIa 6–18) were eligible to continue in screening. Aβ+ participants were randomized to either placebo (n=583) or solanezumab (n=564) in the A4 Study. A subset of Aβ+ underwent tau PET imaging in A4 (n=350). Aβ− were enrolled into the LEARN Study (n=553). MethodsThe details of the methodology for A4 and LEARN screening and outcome measures have been previously described (4, 15) and are briefly summarized here. Participants eligible to screen for the A4 Study were age 65–85 and cognitively unimpaired with CDR-Global score=0, MMSE 25–30, and Weschler Memory Scale-Revised Logical Memory IIa Delayed Recall score of 6–18 (corresponding to approximately 1 SD above and below published age mean scores). All participants were in overall good health, and stable hypertension, diabetes, hypercholesterolemia, mild-moderate small vessel ischemic disease and other common medical ailments were permitted. All participants were required to have a study partner who was familiar with their cognitive function and daily activities.Eligible participants underwent amyloid PET imaging with 18F-Florbetapir PET, measured with a mean cortical imaging standardized uptake value ratio (SUVr) using a cerebellar reference as previously described (16). Amyloid status for eligibility for A4 vs. LEARN (elevated or not elevated) was assessed using an algorithm combining quantitative SUVr methods and qualitative visual read performed at a central laboratory. SUVr's were converted to the standard Centiloid (CL) scale (17). Amyloid status was disclosed to all participants during screening with ongoing assessment and monitoring of psychological wellbeing by the A4 Ethics committee (18).Participants with elevated amyloid on screening amyloid PET and who met all inclusion and exclusion criteria (see https://www.clinicaltrials.gov/study/NCT02008357) were randomly assigned in a 1:1 ratio to receive intravenous solanezumab or placebo. Randomization was stratified according to apolipoprotein E (APOE) e4 carrier status, education level (12 years or less or over 12 years) and trial site. Dosing was initially 400mg intravenously every four weeks but increased to 1600mg IV every four weeks later in the trial.Participants who were otherwise eligible for A4 but did not show elevated amyloid were eligible to enroll in the LEARN Study (https://www.clinicaltrials.gov/study/NCT02488720) until the target enrollment was reached. The LEARN Study launched a year after the A4 Study began recruiting and was conducted at a subset of A4 sites. The LEARN participants underwent the same cognitive and functional assessments as the A4 Study participants.Outcome AssessmentsThe primary outcome in the A4 and LEARN Studies was the four-component Preclinical Alzheimer's Cognitive Composite Scale (PACC) (19), consisting of the Free Recall plus Total (sum of free and cued) score from the Free and Cued Selective Reminding Test (FCSRT, range 0–96) (20), the delayed paragraph recall on the Logical Memory IIa test from the Wechsler Memory Scale and alternative paragraphs developed by Jeri Morris et al. (range 0–25) (21, 22), the Digit-Symbol Substitution Test from the Wechsler Adult Intelligence scale-Revised (23), and the Mini Mental Status Examination (MMSE) (range 0–30) (24). Three versions of the component subtests were alternated to minimize practice effects, and testing was conducted by trained site psychometrists blinded to treatment arm assignment and adverse events. Each component score was converted to a z-score by subtracting the baseline mean for that component and dividing by the baseline standard deviation for that component, resulting in the sum of four z-scores, with negative scores indicating cognitive worsening (25).Secondary endpoints included the Cognitive Function Index (CFI) (26), a set of 15 questions that capture subjective concerns related to cognitive function administered to the participant and study partner separately and then summed (range 0–30, see Amariglio et al in this Issue); the ADCS-Activities of Daily Living Prevention Instrument (ADL) assessed by the study partner (range 0 to 45 (27)); Clinical Dementia Rating – Global Score (CDR-G >0 indicating mild cognitive impairment or dementia); and Clinical Dementia Rating Sum of Boxes (CDR-SB) (range 0 to 18, with higher scores indicating greater global functioning impairment) ((28) see also Rentz et al. in this issue)Baseline imaging and biomarker predictors included 18-F florbetapir amyloid PET (measured in average cortical composite CL as described above) and plasma P-tau217 (immunoassay, see Rissman R et al in this issue for methods). Tau PET imaging was acquired with 18-F flortaucipir in a subset of participants, with an average SUVr measured in a standard template composite of early necortical regions: inferior temporal, fusiform, middle temporal, inferior parietal cortices.Statistical AnalysesNatural cubic spline models were used to investigate the trajectories of the PACC, CFI, and ADL and CDR-SB scales (29). Models included effects for age, education, apolipoprotein E e4 (APOE4) carrier status, tertile group (by amyloid PET or P-tau217), and two spline basis expansion terms for time per tertile group. Clinical Dementia Rating Global (CDR-G) Score progression rates by amyloid PET and P-tau217 groups were estimated by Kaplan-Meier. CDR-GS Progression was defined as two consecutive CDR-GS above 0, or an endpoint CDR-GS above 0 at the end of the double-blind period.A two-step procedure was used to assess the proportion of variance (R2) of PACC change explained by each predictor. First, linear mixed-effect models were fit to each group (placebo, solanezumab, and LEARN). These models included fixed effect for cognitive test alternate version and two spline basis expansion terms for time; and participant-specific random intercepts and slopes. Participant-specific estimated change from baseline at week 240 was derived from these models. In step two, the participant-specific change scores were submitted to a “commonality analysis” (30, 31) based on ordinary least squares regression models considering ten baseline predictors: Amyloid PET, P-tau217, Baseline PACC, CFI, age, APOE e4 carrier status, female sex, education (years), Race-Ethnic Under-Represented Group (URG) membership, and treatment group (where applicable). Commonality analysis partitions the R2 for each predictor into R2 unique to each predictor and R2 shared with other predictors by fitting regression models with every combination of predictors.Shaded regions in graphics represent 95% confidence intervals. All p-values and 95% CIs are nominal (i.e., not adjusted for multiplicity). All analyses were conducted using R version 4.4.0. Electronic Supplementary MaterialSupplementary material is available in the online version of this article at https://doi.org/10.14283/jpad.2024.122. Supplementary material, approximately 16.0 KB. Funding: The A4 and LEARN Studies were supported by a public-private-philanthropic partnership which included funding from the National Institute of Aging of the National Institutes of Health (R01 AG063689, U19AG010483 and U24AG057437), Eli Lilly (also the supplier of active medication and placebo), the Alzheimer's Association, the Accelerating Medicines Partnership through the Foundation for the National Institutes of Health, the GHR Foundation, the Davis Alzheimer Prevention Program, the Yugilbar Foundation, an anonymous foundation, and additional private donors to Brigham and Women's Hospital, with in-kind support from Avid Radiopharmaceuticals, Cogstate, Albert Einstein College of Medicine and the Foundation for Neurologic Diseases.Ethical Standards: Approval from an institutional review board or ethics committee was obtained at each of the sites. All participants and their study partners provided written informed consent prior to data collection, which included consent for data sharing.Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest: RAS reports grant support from the National Institutes on Aging, National Institutes of Health, Alzheimer's Association, GHR Foundation, and Gates Ventures. She has received trial research funding from Eisai and Eli Lilly for public-private partnership trials. She reported serving as a consultant for AbbVie, AC Immune, Alector, Biohaven, Bristol-Myers-Squibb, Ionis, Janssen, Genentech, Merck, Prothena, Roche, and Vaxxinity. MCD has received research funding from the National Institutes of Health, Janssen, Eli Lilly, and Eisai, reports consulting fees from Roche and his spouse is a full-time employee of Janssen. KAJ has received research funding from National Institutes on Aging, National Institutes of Health, Alzheimer's Association, and the GHR Foundation. He has served as a consultant for Merck, Novartis, Janssen, and Prothena. RAR has research support from the National Institute on Aging, the Alzheimer's Association and is a consultant for Amydis Inc, Bioivt, Lexeo, Keystone Bio, Allyx, DiamiR, Ionis and PrecisionMed. CJ has received research support from the National Institutes of Health (NIH), the Alzheimer's Association, American Heart Association, Eli Lilly and Eisai. DMR received salary and research support from the National Institutes of Health and has received payment or honoraria from USC Institute on Methods and Protocols for Advancement of Clinical Trials in ADRD (IMPACT AD) course and External Advisory Boards from the University of California-Davis, Washington University, Boston University and Northwestern. She has also received travel support to ACTC meetings, to the University of California Advisory Board Meeting and the Washington University Advisory Board Meeting. JG has received research support from the National Institutes of Health (NIH), the Alzheimer's Association, BrightFocus Foundation, Eli Lilly, Biogen, Genentech, and Eisai. He has received personal fees for providing consulting to SiteRx and editorial service to Alzheimer's & Dementia. JLH has received research support from the National Institutes of Health, the Alzheimer's Association, Eli Lilly, and Eisai and has received honoraria from USC Institute on Methods and Protocols for Advancement of Clinical Trials in ADRD (IMPACT AD) RR has received research support from the National Institutes of Health (NIH), the Alzheimer's Association, American Heart Association, Eli Lilly and Eisai. AL has received research support from the National Institutes of Health (NIH), the Alzheimer's Association, American Heart Association, Eli Lilly and Eisai. OL has received research support from the National Institutes of Health (NIH), the Alzheimer's Association, American Heart Association, Eli Lilly and Eisai. GJM has received research support from the National Institutes of Health (NIH), the Alzheimer's Association, American Heart Association, Gates Ventures, Eli Lilly, and Eisai. RY is an employee and minor shareholder of Eli Lilly and Company. KCH is an employee and minor shareholder of Eli Lilly and Company. JS is an employee and minor shareholder of Eli Lilly and Company. PSA has received grants or contracts from the National Institutes of Health (NIH), Alzheimer's Association, Foundation for NIH (FNIH), Lilly, Janssen and Eisai and consulting fees from Merck, Biogen, AbbVie, Roche, and Immunobrain Checkpoint.