2. Materials and Methods2.1. Study DesignParticipants were recruited from our previously conducted cross-sectional study about viral hepatitis in Kyrgyzstan . In that study, 1073 individuals were screened. HBsAg was detected in sera from 33 individuals (HBsAg seropositive). Of the remaining 1040 individuals, 246 agreed to participate in this study. After completion of the field study, 105 participants were considered for the final analysis based on the availability of serum samples for all four study time points, having received 3 vaccine doses, and being anti-HBsAg seronegative before the 1st vaccine dose. All study visits took place in a family medicine center (FMC) in Bishkek, the capital of Kyrgyzstan. FMCs, formerly known as polyclinics, are responsible for outpatient health care, and there are 19 FMCs in Bishkek. Study visits, including blood draws and vaccination, took place in FMC no. 11, which is responsible for approximately 30,000 residents in Bishkek . The vaccine was administered intramuscularly (deltoid muscle) by nurses trained in the technique.All study participants received three doses of the inactivated vaccine Regevak-B (Binnofarm Group, Moscow, Russia). The effectiveness of this vaccine had previously been assessed in a field study involving 560 participants in 4 different locations in Russia, wherein 67.2–88.1% of vaccinees developed protective titers after the 3rd dose . Participants in our study were randomized to one of two study arms: one group received the vaccine doses at months 0, 1, and 3 (0-1-3 schedule), whereas the other group received doses at months 0, 1, and 6 (0-1-6 schedule). Blood samples were taken before each vaccination and 19–275 days after the 3rd vaccine dose. Serum samples were obtained by centrifugation and stored at −80 °C at the study site in Bishkek until they were transferred to the Hannover Unified Biobank (Hannover, Germany) after the conclusion of the field study. Subsequently, samples were transferred to the laboratory site at the Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research (Braunschweig, Germany) for determination of anti-HBsAg titers. All samples were continuously kept frozen until the time of serological analyses. The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Ministry of Health in Kyrgyzstan (no. 01-2-118). Written informed consent was collected from all participants. Figure 1 illustrates how the final study population was derived from the larger population that was screened in our original cross-sectional study on the prevalence of viral hepatitis in Kyrgyzstan .2.2. Serological AssayAnti-hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) antibody titers were determined using a quantitative anti-HBsAg ELISA kit (Creative Diagnostics, Shirley, NY, USA, cat. no. DEIA060). The assay and calculation of anti-HBsAg titers (mIU/mL) were carried out according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Sample absorbance values (OD450nm) that were lower or equal to the Blank OD450nm were assigned a titer of 0.01 mIU/mL to allow for subsequent analysis. Seroprotection was defined by an anti-HBsAg titer of ≥10 mIU/mL. Accordingly, vaccine non-responders were defined as those with an anti-HBsAg titer of <10 mIU/mL.2.3. Statistical AnalysisThe significance of differences between the two study groups was determined with a Chi-squared test or a Mann–Whitney U test as indicated. For analysis within a group, the Friedman test was applied. The Spearman correlation coefficient, r, was determined for correlation analyses. All statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism (version 9.4.1, www.graphpad.com). 2.1. Study DesignParticipants were recruited from our previously conducted cross-sectional study about viral hepatitis in Kyrgyzstan . In that study, 1073 individuals were screened. HBsAg was detected in sera from 33 individuals (HBsAg seropositive). Of the remaining 1040 individuals, 246 agreed to participate in this study. After completion of the field study, 105 participants were considered for the final analysis based on the availability of serum samples for all four study time points, having received 3 vaccine doses, and being anti-HBsAg seronegative before the 1st vaccine dose. All study visits took place in a family medicine center (FMC) in Bishkek, the capital of Kyrgyzstan. FMCs, formerly known as polyclinics, are responsible for outpatient health care, and there are 19 FMCs in Bishkek. Study visits, including blood draws and vaccination, took place in FMC no. 11, which is responsible for approximately 30,000 residents in Bishkek . The vaccine was administered intramuscularly (deltoid muscle) by nurses trained in the technique.All study participants received three doses of the inactivated vaccine Regevak-B (Binnofarm Group, Moscow, Russia). The effectiveness of this vaccine had previously been assessed in a field study involving 560 participants in 4 different locations in Russia, wherein 67.2–88.1% of vaccinees developed protective titers after the 3rd dose . Participants in our study were randomized to one of two study arms: one group received the vaccine doses at months 0, 1, and 3 (0-1-3 schedule), whereas the other group received doses at months 0, 1, and 6 (0-1-6 schedule). Blood samples were taken before each vaccination and 19–275 days after the 3rd vaccine dose. Serum samples were obtained by centrifugation and stored at −80 °C at the study site in Bishkek until they were transferred to the Hannover Unified Biobank (Hannover, Germany) after the conclusion of the field study. Subsequently, samples were transferred to the laboratory site at the Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research (Braunschweig, Germany) for determination of anti-HBsAg titers. All samples were continuously kept frozen until the time of serological analyses. The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Ministry of Health in Kyrgyzstan (no. 01-2-118). Written informed consent was collected from all participants. Figure 1 illustrates how the final study population was derived from the larger population that was screened in our original cross-sectional study on the prevalence of viral hepatitis in Kyrgyzstan . 2.3. Statistical AnalysisThe significance of differences between the two study groups was determined with a Chi-squared test or a Mann–Whitney U test as indicated. For analysis within a group, the Friedman test was applied. The Spearman correlation coefficient, r, was determined for correlation analyses. All statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism (version 9.4.1, www.graphpad.com).