ConclusionsReactivity to AgSAP and AgTRIO reflects exposure to infectious mosquitoes or recent bites rather than general mosquito exposure, highlighting their promise for incorporation into multiplexed assays for serosurveillance of population-level changes in P falciparum–infected mosquito exposure. DISCUSSIONWe determined that serological responses to MSAs can effectively indicate exposure to infectious mosquitoes, potentially serving as an alternative to EIR as a measure of P falciparum transmission intensity. Unlike EIR estimates, which are limited by sampling issues (eg, seasonal variation), precision (eg, variation in measuring HBR and contribution of indoor/outdoor biting), and accuracy (eg, spatial and temporal heterogeneity in vector density) , serological measurements are a more direct measure of the effect of mosquito bites on humans and may be less prone to such issues. Among the 4 MSAs, humoral responses to AgSAP and AgTRIO were the best indicators of recent infectious mosquito bites.Higher IgG Reactivity to AgSAP and AgTRIO Is Associated With Malaria EndemicityWe show here that reactivity to AgSAP is higher in a moderate-transmission area than in healthy controls from a nonendemic area (Figure 2A), consistent with a previous study . Similarly, AgTRIO responses were higher in both low- and moderate-transmission areas relative to a nonendemic area (Figure 2B). While a previous study found no significant difference , our study may have had greater power to detect this effect. Neither AgSAP nor AgTRIO could discriminate between populations in areas of different malaria endemicity (Figure 2A and 2B).Although mosGILT and SAMSP1 are directly associated with Plasmodium sporozoites during transmission  and individuals in malaria-endemic Senegal were previously found to have higher SAMSP1 IgG reactivity than individuals living in nonendemic France , serological responses to mosGILT and SAMSP1 did not show clear patterns in relation to infectious mosquito exposure. The high reactivity of mosGILT, SAMSP1, and SG6 for the negative HCW cohort limited our ability to distinguish between populations.In the Absence of Infection, AgSAP, AgTRIO, mosGILT, and SAMSP1 Are Not Biomarkers of General Mosquito Exposure or Malaria Transmission SeasonThe lack of differences between uninfected people in the transmission and nontransmission seasons for Thiès (comparison not available for Kédougou) and the lack of difference in cohorts in low- and moderate-transmission areas suggests that these MSAs are unable to determine seasonal differences in malaria exposure or intensity in the absence of infection. SG6 also did not show these differences, contrary to previous studies [7, 10–14, 18]. It is possible that SG6 differences would be observed in a high-transmission area rather than the low- and moderate-transmission areas tested here. SG6 reactivity was significantly higher in Kédougou in the transmission season than in Thiès outside of the transmission season, which could be due to higher exposure to mosquito bites due both to seasonal and regional differences.AgSAP and AgTRIO Are Promising Indicators of Recent or Infectious Mosquito ExposureAgSAP and AgTRIO both show similar trends in serological responses after exposure to an infectious mosquito. In a low-transmission area, where infectious mosquito bites are less common, IgG responses to both AgSAP and AgTRIO peak after infectious mosquito exposure (indicated by malaria infection) and decline by 3 months after infection. AgSAP  and AgTRIO  are both upregulated in infectious mosquitoes, and AgSAP and AgTRIO reactivity were highest among individuals with recent infection, suggesting that AgSAP and AgTRIO serological responses peak 2–4 weeks after clinical malaria, which is itself at least 7–10 days after an infectious bite . In both the low-transmission area of Thiès and the moderate-transmission area of Kédougou, AgSAP responses with recent infection were significantly higher than during acute infection (Figure 2A). AgTRIO responses were significantly higher during recent infection than acute infection in Thiès but not in Kédougou (Figure 2B). For both AgSAP and AgTRIO, responses decline after recent infection and are significantly lower 3 months after initial infection (Figure 3A and 3B), suggesting that the kinetics of AgSAP build a couple of weeks after infection and then decline relatively quickly.SAMSP1 IgG responses are higher in individuals in Thiès with acute and recent malaria infection relative to responses in uninfected people in and outside of the transmission season and to those in a non-malaria-endemic area (Figure 2D). SAMSP1 reactivity may also peak 2–4 weeks after infection and decrease by 3 months after infection, although differences were not observed in Kédougou.Seropositivity Could Show Differences Between PopulationsA benefit of AgSAP and AgTRIO responses may lie in their ability to discriminate among changes in populations, for example, before and after a community-based intervention. Bimodal distributions can be an effective way to determine cutoffs. The current distribution of AgTRIO does not strongly fit a bimodal distribution, which limits this method's efficacy, but this method could still be explored in a disease surveillance context where the inclusion of more samples could improve the fit of the distribution . Here, AgSAP had a relatively low sensitivity and a high specificity, while AgTRIO had high sensitivity and a low specificity. Both AgSAP and AgTRIO had higher sensitivity among recently infected than acutely infected individuals.As multiple P falciparum antigens have been used to estimate malaria prevalence , we investigated whether AgSAP and AgTRIO results together could increase sensitivity and specificity. Results between AgSAP and AgTRIO were highly correlated (Spearman ρ = 0.636), and their response kinetics were similar, indicating no substantial benefit in combining these antigens.Cohorts in ContextThis study tested samples from 2 different regions of Senegal: Thiès, a low-transmission area with an EIR <5 infectious bites per person per year [32–34], and Kédougou, a moderate-transmission area with an EIR of approximately 250 . The low malaria transmission in Thiès has been tracked over time , and in the longitudinal cohort tested here, only 4 of 70 individuals had malaria reinfections over 2 years of follow-up. Conversely, since malaria transmission is higher in Kédougou, we expect this cohort to have been exposed to infectious mosquitoes more frequently than the Thiès cohort. This could result in different MSA immune responses between these areas, particularly for antigens upregulated in Plasmodium-infected mosquitoes. Therefore, individuals from Kédougou may be more likely to get a “boosting” effect from exposure to infected mosquitoes.As such, longitudinal changes in responses from Thiès may demonstrate a more direct indicator of responses after exposure to Plasmodium-infected mosquito antigens. The longitudinal data from Thiès show clear peaks in AgSAP and AgTRIO responses 2–4 weeks after subjects had symptomatic malaria, and then tend to reduce during the subsequent 2 years of follow-up. Longitudinal data from moderate transmission Kédougou likewise show high AgSAP and AgTRIO reactivity up to 4 weeks after symptomatic malaria, but without longer follow-up, we cannot compare long-term kinetics of antibody responses in Kédougou to those in Thiès.LimitationsWe tested samples from a low- and moderate-transmission area of Senegal, but we cannot exclude the possibility that serological results may differ in an extremely high-transmission area. Although the kinetics of AgSAP and AgTRIO suggest that serological responses diminish within a couple of months, a person in a high-transmission area could be exposed to infectious mosquitoes more frequently. Our Kédougou cohorts aimed to model high transmission, but transmission in Kédougou is lower than transmission in intense, hyperendemic regions. A high-transmission area with more infectious mosquito exposure could cause serological responses to remain high, obscuring changes in malaria transmission. Additionally, we cannot distinguish between recent exposure to infectious mosquito bites that do or do not result in malaria infection. This could be evaluated, along with more exact timing of responses after infectious mosquito bites, through controlled human malaria infections.There are homologous proteins to the proteins tested here in other Anopheles species, so reactivity to certain proteins may result from exposure to similar proteins in other mosquitoes (Supplementary Tables 4 and 5). If so, the distribution of mosquito species in a region could affect serological results. Cross-reactivity across Anopheles species has yet to be empirically tested. Most P falciparum transmission in West Africa is driven by An. gambiae, An. arabiensis, An. coluzzii, An. melas, An. funestus, An. stephensi, and An. nili . In Senegal, An. gambiae is the predominant vector, though An. nili plays a relatively larger role in southeastern Senegal, including Kédougou . CONCLUSIONSThis is a promising first study investigating human reactivity to 4 novel MSAs in areas of low and moderate malaria transmission. These salivary antigens represent potential complimentary antigens to SG6, an MSA that is a marker of exposure to mosquito bites, and P falciparum antigens that are markers of malaria parasite exposure to different stages of the parasite life cycle, as antigens that uniquely represent potential markers of recent exposure to infectious mosquito bites. AgSAP and AgTRIO are promising markers of exposure to infectious mosquito bites in low- and moderate-transmission areas. Further studies could investigate their utility in highly endemic areas. The multiplex approach used here is a flexible method that allows for the possibility of adding additional markers, which could make tests of these antigens in high-transmission areas and more geographical regions more feasible. This approach could efficiently track population-level changes in P falciparum exposure, particularly in regions already using multiplex surveillance, and before and after vector control interventions.