ConclusionsIn a large cohort of cognitively unimpaired individuals enrolled in a Phase 3 clinical trial and companion observational study, these findings confirm that higher baseline levels of amyloid and tau markers are associated with increased rates of cognitive decline and progression to functional impairment. Interestingly, plasma P-tau217 was the best predictor of decline in the overall sample, superior to baseline amyloid PET. Neocortical tau was the strongest predictor of cognitive decline in the subgroup with tau PET, suggesting that tau deposition is most closely linked to clinical decline. These findings indicate that biomarkers of AD pathology are useful to predict decline in an older asymptomatic population and may prove valuable in the selection of individuals for disease-modifying treatments. DiscussionOur findings demonstrate that higher levels of amyloid and tau biomarkers are associated with greater cognitive and functional decline over 4.5 years in a group of older individuals who were cognitively and functionally unimpaired at baseline. The observed cognitive and functional decline in the Aβ+ A4 cohort, particularly among those in the highest tertile of amyloid PET and plasma P-tau217, supports the view that cognitively unimpaired individuals with evidence of brain amyloidosis represent a very early stage of AD, specifically “preclinical AD” rather than being at “increased risk for AD” (32).Plasma P-tau217 was the strongest predictor of cognitive decline within the overall A4 cohort (across both treatment arms), and across LEARN and the A4 placebo arm analyses, with a smaller contribution within the LEARN cohort alone. The predictive value of baseline P-tau217 on cognitive decline was greater than baseline amyloid PET. Although P-tau217 is thought to primarily reflect amyloid plaque burden (33), these findings suggest that P-tau217 levels may reflect the degree to which amyloid is triggering downstream change, including tauopathy (i.e., “the amyloid is bothering the tau”). P-tau217 is thought to reflect an early stage of tau phosphorylation related to misfolding of tau into the paired helical filaments that form tangles, as well as tau neurites that surround amyloid plaques. The predictive value of plasma P-tau217, in comparison to amyloid PET, has important implications for improving the efficiency of early intervention and primary prevention trial designs. These findings provide additional support for the supposition that plasma P-tau217 may prove useful as a clinical tool for selecting candidates for amyloid-lowering immunotherapy (34).Although P-tau217 is associated with elevated amyloid and tau PET levels, there have been several reports that plasma and CSF P-tau217 levels begin to rise prior to standard thresholds used to determine amyloid PET positivity in autosomal dominant AD (35). Interestingly in the LEARN cohort, which had very low amyloid PET levels at baseline (mean of 4CL), P-tau217 was still a significant predictor of cognitive trajectories. This may point to a pathophysiologic role of amyloid and tau in individuals below the A4 cutoff for amyloid elevation, supporting future intervention studies at an even earlier stage in the disease spectrum. Furthermore, even within the group of just Aβ+ participants enrolled in A4, higher P-tau217 levels predicted more rapid PACC decline, suggesting that plasma measures may have predictive value across the full range of amyloid accumulation observed in early stages of AD.Although the A4 and LEARN Studies enrolled participants within a very narrow range of “normal” cognitive performance, baseline PACC remained a significant predictor of decline even with the biomarker and imaging variables in the model, suggesting that there are likely other factors that may reflect cognitive resilience or vulnerability in baseline performance. This finding may also reflect baseline differences in PACC related to time since the accumulation of amyloid and tau pathology began (36), as we observed differences in cognitive and functional measures related to amyloid status at screening (15). We also note that baseline PACC performance was a strong predictor in LEARN. LEARN participants did not demonstrate cognitive decline over the nearly 5 year period, instead showing evidence of practice effects early in the study and finishing at the baseline level of performance overall. This finding suggests that in the absence of substantial amyloid accumulation in brain, age-related cognitive decline is not observed over a 5 year period.These findings also indicate that the degree of AD pathology is a strong predictor of likelihood of functional decline. In the highest tertile of baseline amyloid PET and plasma P-tau217 values, nearly 50% of the participants progressed to functional impairment, defined as two consecutive global CDR 0.5 or higher ratings or at their final CDR timepoint in the study. This result suggests that cognitively unimpaired individuals with most elevated AD biomarkers are indeed likely to progress to symptomatic AD within 5 years, in contrast to some of the epidemiological projections that employed only binary biomarker categorization for life-time risk of impairment (37).The level of tau PET signal in early neocortical regions was the strongest predictor of cognitive decline in the subset of the A4 Study who underwent flortaucipir tau PET imaging, consistent with the hypothesis that tau spreading into the neocortex signals impending cognitive impairment (13). Neocortical tau PET level was more predictive of cognitive decline than plasma P-tau217 levels among cognitively unimpaired older individuals, consistent with previous reports in patients with symptomatic AD (38). Interestingly, P-tau217 still contributed additional unique variance in prediction of cognitive change. Previous work has suggested that plasma P-tau217 may predict future tau deposition observable on tau PET imaging (39), and may indicate earlier stages of the pathophysiological process that leads to AD tauopathy. Further work is ongoing to explore the specific anatomic progression of tauopathy in the A4 Study participants, including exploring early tau deposition in medial temporal lobe regions (40), and the anatomic-temporal relationship with cognitive decline.Consistent with the lack of benefit observed in the solanezumab group compared to placebo reported in the primary analyses (4), we did not observe any significant effect of treatment group in these analyses including amyloid and tau markers. Nevertheless, these findings inform the design and interpretation of ongoing and future trials. The substantial progression observed on the CDR, CFI and ADL scales, measures of clinically meaningful change, among A4 participants with higher levels of amyloid and tau pathology, compared to the minimal decline seen in LEARN support the feasibility of establishing clinical efficacy of candidate therapeutics in the preclinical AD population. Baseline amyloid PET burden and level of P-tau217 was a strong predictor of subsequent decline, consistent with a pivotal role for amyloid accumulation in driving the pathophysiological process of AD and associated impairment. These findings suggest that aggressive amyloid reduction may be necessary even at the preclinical stage of AD to prevent cognitive and functional decline, and support the rationale for testing amyloid-removing antibodies in preclinical AD populations, including secondary prevention trials such as the AHEAD Study testing lecanemab (NCT04468659)(41) and TRAILBLAZER-ALZ 3 testing donanemab (NCT05026866).LimitationsThese participants (both A4 and LEARN) volunteered and met basic screening criteria for a clinical trial aiming to prevent cognitive decline in preclinical AD, and thus may not represent a generalizable population. These participants were in general good health, willing to commit to multiple visits over several years, and had higher rates of family history of dementia than the general older population (15). Despite substantial efforts to improve the racial and ethnic diversity in these studies, the A4 and LEARN cohorts were not adequately representative of all older individuals at risk for cognitive decline. Recent work has highlighted potential differences in the prevalence of abnormal amyloid PET and AD biomarkers among underrepresented race and ethnic groups (URG) (42, 43, 44). We did not observe any differences in rates of cognitive decline comparing participants from URG to overrepresented white participants, in analyses including other demographic factors, baseline performance, and baseline biomarkers and imaging variables, but are very limited in our ability to draw conclusions with the inadequate race/ethnic diversity in the A4 and LEARN cohorts.Both A4 and LEARN studies experienced prolonged disruption of activities at the sites because of social distancing measures due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Some LEARN sites were closed for observational study activities for over one year, and there was greater attrition in the LEARN Study than A4. It should also be acknowledged that the participants in LEARN and A4 were aware of their amyloid PET status (only disclosed as elevated vs. non-elevated (18), which could have influenced their assessments. However, the binary disclosure at baseline is less likely to account for the increasing differences in decline over the 4.5-year period and could not account for the observed association of greater amyloid load with more rapid decline among the Aβ+ A4 arms. The P-tau217 results were not disclosed at any point during the studies.Finally, with these amyloid and tau baseline variables, we explained only 30–52% of the total variance in PACC decline across the various models and cohorts, suggesting that additional measures may be useful in more fully capturing the contributing factors. We chose to include only one variable from each of the categories (baseline amyloid PET, plasma, tau PET, cognition, function) to predict cognitive decline to avoid overfitting the models but will continue to explore additional variables from these modalities. Ongoing work with vascular risk factors, such as systolic blood pressure, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) measures, including hippocampal volume, white matter hyperintensities, functional connectivity (see Boyle et al in this issue), and microhemorrhage measures (see Shirzadi et al in this issue), may add to the ability to predict cognitive and functional decline. Recent work suggests that vascular risk may be synergistic with amyloid in accelerating tau and cognitive decline (45) and that imaging markers of vascular health may contribute to resilience (46). Furthermore, neuropathological studies clearly suggest that other proteinopathies, such as TDP-43 and alphasynuclein, likely contribute to cognitive decline in this age range (47, 48), but are currently lacking quantitative biomarkers that are easily obtained in vivo. Despite all these complexities, our findings suggest that a simple plasma assay for P-tau217 may be very useful for prediction of future cognitive decline in asymptomatic individuals, and to identify those most likely to benefit from very early intervention with anti-amyloid therapeutics.