IntroductionVector-borne diseases are the most important illnessin terms of human health burden, both with regard to morbidity and mortality, accounting for 17% of all infectious sickness1. Malaria infection is transmitted by the bites of infected female Anopheles (An.) mosquitoes and remains the most common parasitic disease in low-income countries, although significant progress has been made in reducing the global malaria burden2. In Cameroon, nearly 7 million malaria cases and 15,048 of deaths were reported in 20202.In sub-Saharan Africa, the risk of malaria is traditionally considered to be significantly higher in rural areas3,4 and this could be explained by environmental factors that play a key role in the mosquito density and consequently in the malaria transmission5. Mosquitoes find favourable breeding grounds in pools of clean stagnant water, usually in swamps, puddles, ponds, rice fields6,7. Other factors such as climate, season or poorly constructed houses with bushes around them also contribute to a higher risk of malaria infection8.Most of the major control strategies have been widely implemented in the rural areas. Two forms of vector control (insecticide-treated mosquito nets (ITNs) and indoor residual spraying of insecticides) are effective in a wide range of circumstances9. In Cameroon, the mass distribution campaign (MDC) of long-lasting insecticidal nets (LLINs) which is the principal vector control strategy against mosquito’s bites was implemented in 2011, with more than 8.5 million of LLINs distributed throughout the country10. This was followed by a second mass distribution in 2015 and a third with the distribution of about eight million LLINs in 201911. However, little is known about the impact of these strategies regarding at the individual level of exposure to mosquitoes bites. Assessing human exposure to Anopheles vectors, and therefore the risk of malaria transmission, helps to evaluate the effectiveness of vector control interventions. Currently, the assessment of the human exposure to the vector bites is based on entomological methods that estimate the entomological inoculation rate (EIR), which is the standard method and is usually interpreted as the number of infectious bites received by an individual per unit of time3,12. However, this parameter has significant drawbacks and limitations, such as inaccuracy due to the micro-heterogeneity of malaria transmission, especially in areas of low transmission areas, during the dry season, urban areas and at high altitudes locations12–14. It is also expensive, time-consuming, not suitable for use at the individual level, and sometimes very difficult or impossible, especially when mosquito densities are very low15. EIR also depends on both human biting rate (HBR) and mosquito infection rate (IR), which can be difficult to estimate in low transmission settings and may lack sensitivity because the number of Plasmodium-positive samples is insufficient to estimate the sporozoite rates (SR) and the number of mosquitoes collected is often very low in the dry season16,17. In addition, human-landing catches (HLCs), which are commonly used to collect adult mosquitoes for human exposure assessment, have limited feasibility due to ethical considerations and logistical constraints, and results cannot be extrapolated to children18–20.In this context, an alternative serological method was developed to measure human exposure to arthropods bites21,22 and the specific immunoglobulin G (IgG) response to the gSG6-P1 peptide was validated as a biomarker of human exposure to Anopheles bites23. This IgG response to gSG6-P1 can be used in the context of low exposure to Anopheles bites and in local transmission hotspots to assess malaria risk in urban and rural areas. This tool was also shown to be useful to assess the effectiveness vector control interventions in different settings, including West Africa (Ivory Coast, Senegal), East Africa (Angola)24–27, the Americas28,29 and Asia30,31. Some studies have also shown that this immune response correlates with the Plasmodium infection in humans26,29,32,33. In addition, studies have shown that specific IgG responses to this gSG6-P1 peptide provide an accurate assessment of low and very low levels of exposure to the major malaria vector in Africa, An. gambiae, as well as to the second major malaria vector in West Africa, An. funestus23,34.Recently, for the first time in the Central African region, we conducted a study in Cameroon that validated the use of gSG6-P1 IgG response as a biomarker of exposure to malaria vector bites in mainland and island areas of the Littoral region, where An. gambiae s.l. is the main vector35. More interestingly, we recently reported in Southern Cameroon that IgG response to An. gambiae gSG6-P1 salivary peptide could be detected in humans exposed mainly to An. moucheti and An. paludis bites, known as secondary malaria vectors in Cameroon36. Based on this and all previous studies conducted from the Central African region, the present prospective population-based study aims to quantify the level of anti-gSG6-P1 salivary peptide IgG response according to the density of Anopheles mosquitoes and seasonal variation (rainy- and dry-season parasite transmission) in a village of the Centre region of Cameroon.