2. Materials and Methods2.1. Study Design and PopulationThe study was conducted at Sincan Training and Research Hospital from January 2020 to 2024. The study included HBsAg-positive samples, accompanied by confirmed data on HDVAg/Ab, anti-HBe, HBeAg, anti-HIV, anti-HCV, HBV DNA, HDV-RNA, HIV RNA, and HCV RNA levels, as well as various biochemical markers. To ensure data accuracy and prevent duplication, only the first sample from each patient was included in the analysis. All results were derived from the initial presentation of patients to our hospital, reflecting their baseline clinical and laboratory status. Patients with acute HBV infection, defined by anti-HBc IgM positivity or serum aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) levels exceeding 10 times the upper limit of normal, were excluded. Furthermore, individuals with a platelet count ≤150 × 109/L, including those diagnosed with idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) or thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP), were excluded from the study. Owing to the unavailability of a comprehensive treatment history, the analysis did not consider patients’ treatment status. The aforementioned exclusion criteria ensured a homogenous cohort for evaluating the study parameters and their clinical implications. This study was conducted with the approval of the Sincan Training and Research Hospital’s Clinical Research Ethics Committee (approval no: BAEK-2025-03). The study was carried out in accordance with the Helsinki Declaration.2.2. Data CollectionThe serological and molecular markers analysed included anti-HBs, HBeAg, anti-HBe, HBV-DNA, anti-HDV, HDV-Ag, anti-HIV, and anti-HCV. Biochemical parameters such as ALT and AST, serum albumin, total bilirubin, platelet count, and international normalised ratio (INR) values were retrieved from hospital records. Noninvasive fibrosis scores, including the FIB-4 score and the APRI score, were calculated via previously described formulae .2.3. Laboratory MethodsSerological markers (HBsAg, anti-HBe, HBeAg, anti-HCV, and anti-HIV) were analysed via the ARCHITECT (Abbott, Abbott Park, IL, USA) and MaglumiX3-8 (Snibe, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China) systems. Anti-HDV seropositivity was assessed via the QIAsymphony® DSP Virus/Pathogen Midi Kit (QIAGEN, Hilden, North Rhine-Westphalia, Germany). The quantification of HBV DNA was conducted via the Artus® HBV QS-RGQ kit, whereas the assessment of HCV RNA and HDV RNA levels was performed via the Artus® HCV QS-RGQ kit and real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) on the Rotor Gene Q platform (QIAGEN, Hilden, North Rhine-Westphalia, Germany).2.4. Biochemical and Haematological AnalysisAST, ALT, albumin, and total bilirubin levels were analysed via Architect C16000 (Abbott, Abbott Park, IL, USA) and Beckman AU 5800 clinical chemistry analysers (Beckman Coulter, Brea, CA, USA). INR levels were measured via Sysmex CS-2500 coagulation analysers (Sysmex Corporation, Kobe, Hyogo, Japan). Finally, platelet counts were obtained from whole blood samples via Mindray BC 6000 (Mindray, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China), Siemens Advia 2120 (Siemens Healthineers, Erlangen, Bavaria, Germany), and ABX Pentra XL 80 haematology analysers (Horiba Medical, Montpellier, Occitanie, France).2.5. Statistical AnalysisData were analysed with the Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS) (IBM Corp., Armonk, NY, USA) 26.0 Statistics package programme. Descriptive characteristics of the patients were given as numbers and percentages. All data were presented as mean, standard deviation, median, minimum, and maximum. The suitability of the data for normal distribution was decided by looking at the skewness and kurtosis values. In the data set, non-normally distributed variables (z) and normally distributed variables (t) were presented as two groups, and the methods to be used in the analysis were selected accordingly. A Chi-Square Test was used to compare liver functions, fibrosis, and demographic parameters in HDV-positive and -negative patients. For normally distributed data, the comparison of various numerical parameters in HDV-positive and -negative patients was examined using an independent sample t-test. In addition, for non-normally distributed data, the Mann–Whitney U Test was used to compare various numerical parameters in HDV-positive and -negative patients. The relationships between HDV positivity and all other variables were analysed using a Spearman Correlation Analysis.ROC analysis was performed to estimate the probability of HDV/Ab, HCV/Ab, and HIV/Ab positivity. The Logistic Regression Method was used to examine the effects of various variables on the probability of being HDV/Ab-, HCV/Ab-, and HIV/Ab-positive. In the whole study, significance levels were determined by considering 0.05 and 0.01 values. All the statistical results were evaluated at the 95% confidence level. 2.1. Study Design and PopulationThe study was conducted at Sincan Training and Research Hospital from January 2020 to 2024. The study included HBsAg-positive samples, accompanied by confirmed data on HDVAg/Ab, anti-HBe, HBeAg, anti-HIV, anti-HCV, HBV DNA, HDV-RNA, HIV RNA, and HCV RNA levels, as well as various biochemical markers. To ensure data accuracy and prevent duplication, only the first sample from each patient was included in the analysis. All results were derived from the initial presentation of patients to our hospital, reflecting their baseline clinical and laboratory status. Patients with acute HBV infection, defined by anti-HBc IgM positivity or serum aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) levels exceeding 10 times the upper limit of normal, were excluded. Furthermore, individuals with a platelet count ≤150 × 109/L, including those diagnosed with idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) or thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP), were excluded from the study. Owing to the unavailability of a comprehensive treatment history, the analysis did not consider patients’ treatment status. The aforementioned exclusion criteria ensured a homogenous cohort for evaluating the study parameters and their clinical implications. This study was conducted with the approval of the Sincan Training and Research Hospital’s Clinical Research Ethics Committee (approval no: BAEK-2025-03). The study was carried out in accordance with the Helsinki Declaration. 2.2. Data CollectionThe serological and molecular markers analysed included anti-HBs, HBeAg, anti-HBe, HBV-DNA, anti-HDV, HDV-Ag, anti-HIV, and anti-HCV. Biochemical parameters such as ALT and AST, serum albumin, total bilirubin, platelet count, and international normalised ratio (INR) values were retrieved from hospital records. Noninvasive fibrosis scores, including the FIB-4 score and the APRI score, were calculated via previously described formulae . 2.3. Laboratory MethodsSerological markers (HBsAg, anti-HBe, HBeAg, anti-HCV, and anti-HIV) were analysed via the ARCHITECT (Abbott, Abbott Park, IL, USA) and MaglumiX3-8 (Snibe, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China) systems. Anti-HDV seropositivity was assessed via the QIAsymphony® DSP Virus/Pathogen Midi Kit (QIAGEN, Hilden, North Rhine-Westphalia, Germany). The quantification of HBV DNA was conducted via the Artus® HBV QS-RGQ kit, whereas the assessment of HCV RNA and HDV RNA levels was performed via the Artus® HCV QS-RGQ kit and real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) on the Rotor Gene Q platform (QIAGEN, Hilden, North Rhine-Westphalia, Germany). 2.4. Biochemical and Haematological AnalysisAST, ALT, albumin, and total bilirubin levels were analysed via Architect C16000 (Abbott, Abbott Park, IL, USA) and Beckman AU 5800 clinical chemistry analysers (Beckman Coulter, Brea, CA, USA). INR levels were measured via Sysmex CS-2500 coagulation analysers (Sysmex Corporation, Kobe, Hyogo, Japan). Finally, platelet counts were obtained from whole blood samples via Mindray BC 6000 (Mindray, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China), Siemens Advia 2120 (Siemens Healthineers, Erlangen, Bavaria, Germany), and ABX Pentra XL 80 haematology analysers (Horiba Medical, Montpellier, Occitanie, France). 2.5. Statistical AnalysisData were analysed with the Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS) (IBM Corp., Armonk, NY, USA) 26.0 Statistics package programme. Descriptive characteristics of the patients were given as numbers and percentages. All data were presented as mean, standard deviation, median, minimum, and maximum. The suitability of the data for normal distribution was decided by looking at the skewness and kurtosis values. In the data set, non-normally distributed variables (z) and normally distributed variables (t) were presented as two groups, and the methods to be used in the analysis were selected accordingly. A Chi-Square Test was used to compare liver functions, fibrosis, and demographic parameters in HDV-positive and -negative patients. For normally distributed data, the comparison of various numerical parameters in HDV-positive and -negative patients was examined using an independent sample t-test. In addition, for non-normally distributed data, the Mann–Whitney U Test was used to compare various numerical parameters in HDV-positive and -negative patients. The relationships between HDV positivity and all other variables were analysed using a Spearman Correlation Analysis.ROC analysis was performed to estimate the probability of HDV/Ab, HCV/Ab, and HIV/Ab positivity. The Logistic Regression Method was used to examine the effects of various variables on the probability of being HDV/Ab-, HCV/Ab-, and HIV/Ab-positive. In the whole study, significance levels were determined by considering 0.05 and 0.01 values. All the statistical results were evaluated at the 95% confidence level.