BackgroundAmong the Alzheimer’s disease (AD) biomarkers measured in blood, phosphorylated forms of tau (p-tau) have been shown to exhibit a particularly high diagnostic potential. Here, we performed a comprehensive method comparison study, followed by evaluation of the diagnostic performance of eight recent plasma p-tau immunoassays targeting different tau phosphorylation sites, different tau fragments, and that are measured by two distinct platforms. BackgroundLast decade brought technological advancements that enabled fluid Alzheimer’s disease (AD) biomarker detection not only in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) but also in more accessible, peripheral matrices such as blood plasma. In the light of the first disease-modifying therapies (DMT) becoming available, the ongoing CSF-to-plasma biomarker transition is expected to revolutionize the initial diagnostic process, timely intervention, as well as further monitoring of disease progression and response to treatment [1–8].Among the plasma markers, phosphorylated forms of tau emerged as particularly promising to identify AD pathology: similarly to what is observed in CSF, several p-tau forms measured in plasma have been shown to effectively discriminate between patients along the AD continuum and cognitively healthy controls or non-AD dementia patients [9–22]. This has been shown in cohorts with AD pathology defined by analysis of CSF biomarkers , amyloid positron emission tomography (PET) , and in autopsy-confirmed AD cases . Importantly, plasma p-tau forms have been shown to differentiate between the cognitively unimpaired controls without AD pathology and the individuals at the asymptomatic, preclinical AD continuum stage . Although p-tau181 was the first established and commercially available p-tau AD biomarker, recent studies proposed another epitope – p-tau217 – to be the top-performing p-tau marker of early AD pathology [12, 15, 16, 21, 28–30]. Moreover, the diagnostic accuracy of plasma p-tau217 for discrimination of amyloid-PET positivity has been suggested to equal the one observed for its CSF equivalent . Accordingly, the clinical implementation of this marker is being discussed e.g., incorporated in risk prediction models for predicting amyloid status .Technically, plasma p-tau proteoforms can be measured by both mass spectrometry and immunoassay techniques, where both methods enable their highly sensitive and specific detection in blood-derived matrices. At the same time, immunoassays are characterized by higher throughput, with concomitant lower sample volume required . Thanks to both centralized and decentralized testing abilities, immunoassays offer wider accessibility, not limited to highly specialized centers. Additionally, lower cost, shorter sample preparation time, and simple data analysis, jointly contribute to preferential implementation of the immunoassay-based platforms in standard clinical diagnostic laboratories . Although the commercially available immunoassay instruments employ standard principles of sandwich immunoassays, lack of certified reference material, differences in selected antibody pairs, assay set-up, and/or instrument characteristics, might hinder harmonized interpretation of the between-laboratory results obtained by distinct methodologies .In order to complement previous reports evaluating performance of distinct plasma p-tau epitopes [29, 30, 35–38], we conducted a head-to-head comparison of eight immunoassays for detection of plasma tau phosphorylated at T181 or T217 measured on Simoa® HD-X™ and Lumipulse® G600/G1200 automated platforms.