INTRODUCTIONCognitive decline in asymptomatic preclinical Alzheimer's disease (AD) is slow and variable, limiting detection of treatment effects. This study developed models to forecast trajectories and improve trial efficiency. 1INTRODUCTIONAlzheimer's disease (AD) is defined by a prolonged preclinical phase during which individuals exhibit pathological changes, specifically, amyloid‐β accumulation, well before the onset of clinical symptoms. 1 , 2 This preclinical stage provides a crucial opportunity for therapeutic intervention aimed at delaying or preventing symptomatic decline. However, substantial delay and heterogeneity exist in the progression of individuals with biomarker‐confirmed preclinical AD, even among those classified as amyloid‐positive. 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 This variability, along with the characteristically slow rate of cognitive decline in early stages, creates challenges for clinical trial design by increasing uncertainty in treatment effect estimation. As a result, trials require longer durations, large sample sizes, and may suffer from reduced statistical power. 8 , 9 Recent advances in fluid and imaging biomarkers have improved the identification and staging of biological AD. 10 , 11 , 12 , 13 , 14 These markers can be leveraged to forecast future clinical trajectories at the individual level. A growing body of evidence suggests that baseline multimodal data, including plasma phosphorylated tau‐217 (pTau217), amyloid, and tau positron emission tomography (PET), and structural magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), contain prognostic information about future cognitive decline. 3 , 15 , 16 , 17 , 18 , 19 , 20 , 21 , 22 , 23 , 24 , 25 , 26 Recent studies have successfully developed prognostic models from research cohorts and historical controls, capable of predicting longitudinal clinical progression trajectories in early AD. 27 , 28 , 29 Incorporating these models into trial designs and analysis may enhance efficiency and improve statistical power without narrowing inclusion criteria or representativeness of the clinical trial population. 30 , 31 , 32 A promising approach to improving trial efficiency involves using model‐based predictions of expected untreated clinical progression from baseline data as an AD prognostic covariate (APC) in the regression model for estimating treatment effects. 33 The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) guidance supports the use of prognostic covariates associated with clinical outcomes, emphasizing the value of historical data in deriving such covariates. 34 In the Phase II and Phase III trials of lecanemab for early AD, the APC was generated for each participant using a prediction model trained on historical controls with baseline clinical and structural MRI measures. 29 Incorporating the APC into mixed‐effects models for repeated measurements (MMRM) improved precision in estimating treatment effects, reduced bias, and increased statistical power by adjusting for inter‐individual heterogeneity in clinical progression. Simulation studies further revealed that including the APC in MMRM analyses improves statistical power and reduces sample size requirements in early AD trials.Despite their potential, APCs have not yet been evaluated in preclinical AD populations. This gap is particularly significant because cognitive changes in preclinical AD are typically slower and more variable than in symptomatic stages. 4 , 6 , 35 Data from the Anti‐Amyloid Treatment in Asymptomatic Alzheimer's (A4) Study, 36 which enrolled more than 1100 amyloid‐positive, cognitively unimpaired older adults, provides a unique opportunity to develop models using multimodal baseline data to predict clinical progression trajectories and evaluate their utility as APCs for improving trial efficiency.RESEARCH IN CONTEXT Systematic review: We reviewed prior literature using PubMed and meeting abstracts. Several studies have identified baseline predictors of cognitive decline in preclinical Alzheimer's disease (AD), including plasma pTau217, regional tau positron emission tomography (PET), and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) measures. However, few have developed models to forecast individual cognitive trajectories or assessed their utility for optimizing clinical trial design in preclinical AD. Interpretation: Using longitudinal data from the A4 Study, we developed machine learning models to predict 4.5‐year Preclinical Alzheimer's Cognitive Composite (PACC) trajectories in amyloid‐positive, cognitively unimpaired individuals. When applied as prognostic covariates, model‐derived predictions based on baseline features, such as plasma pTau217 and regional tau PET, substantially increased statistical power and reduced sample size requirements in simulated preclinical AD trials. Future directions: Validation in additional cohorts is needed to strengthen generalizability. Future work should assess emerging biomarkers (e.g., plasma eMTBR‐tau243) and quantify the impact of applying model‐derived prognostic covariates in prospective trials targeting preclinical AD. In this study, we developed machine learning models to predict 4.5‐year trajectories of cognitive decline, as measured by the Preclinical Alzheimer's Cognitive Composite (PACC), 37 using baseline clinical assessments, plasma pTau217, structural MRI, and regional tau PET standardized uptake value ratios (SUVRs). These predictions were used to derive APCs. We then simulated their application within an MMRM framework to estimate treatment effects and quantify their impact on statistical power and sample size in hypothetical preclinical AD trials. Building on our prior use of APCs in early AD, this work extends their utility to the earliest clinically identifiable stage of the AD continuum.