1IntroductionMyasthenia gravis (MG) is a T-cell-dependent, B-cell-mediated autoimmune disease caused by antibodies targeting the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (AChR) or other components of the post-synaptic muscle endplate at the neuromuscular junction (NMJ) (1). The clinical presentation of MG ranges from an isolated ocular form to severe weakness of the limb, bulbar and respiratory muscles. The age of onset varies from childhood to late adulthood, with disease peaks observed in younger adult women and older men (2). MG represents a growing burden globally due to its increasing prevalence, substantial healthcare costs, reduced quality of life, and the significant psychosocial challenges it poses on patients and caregivers (3–5).From both clinical and immunological perspectives, MG is a heterogeneous autoimmune disorder. The identification of reliable biomarkers is promising for improving diagnostic accuracy, distinguishing MG from other diseases associated with muscle weakness, guiding therapeutic decision-making, and evaluating prognosis (2). Previous studies have shown that delayed treatment or poor adherence can worsen the disease burden in MG, with around 60% of patients initially presenting with ocular symptoms eventually progressing to generalized MG. Kimiaki et al. introduced the concept of early fast therapy, highlighting that repeated strategies such as plasma exchange or intravenous immunoglobulin enabled MG patients to more frequently and rapidly achieve minimal manifestations or better, while maintaining prednisolone at ≤5 mg/day for ≥6 months (6). Autoantibodies against the components at the NMJ serve as sensitive, specific, and well-established diagnostic markers for MG. Approximately 80% of MG patients present with autoantibodies against AChR, while a smaller subset is seropositive for antibodies targeting muscle-specific kinase (MuSK), low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 4 (LRP4), or agrin (2). Additionally, AChR-antibody (AChR-Ab) titers have also been used as a biomarker for the therapeutic response of immunotherapies (7), although the absolute levels of these autoantibodies do not correlate with disease severity (8).Beyond pathogenic autoantibodies, various potential biomarkers have been identified to be associated with MG, including microRNAs (e.g., miR-146), inflammatory cytokines (e.g., IFN-γ, IL-21), complement segments (e.g., C5a), and serum metabolites (e.g., arachidonic acid) (9–12). However, these findings were restrained to insufficient validation or small sample sizes. The emergence of high-throughput omics profiling techniques has facilitated biomarker discovery, with genome-wide association studies (GWAS) identifying specific HLA variants (e.g., HLA-B*08:01) and proteomic analyses revealing ITIH3 as a potential biomarker (13, 14). Peripheral metabolomics, offering an accessible approach to evaluate inflammatory status in MG patients, represents a promising yet unexplored avenue for biomarker discovery.In this study, we leveraged metabolic screening data from the UK Biobank (UKB) cohort of 502,400 adults and an independent Chinese MG cohort of 120 patients to: (1) identify novel peripheral biomarkers associated with the MG; (2) validate these biomarkers in an independent MG cohort and assess the associations with clinical and immunological parameters ( Figure 1 ).Figure 1Flowchart of patient enrollment in this study. This flowchart illustrates the process of screening and identification of serum Cys-C as a potential biomarker for MG in the UKB cohort (n = 502,400), including 191 MG patients and 118,493 HCs, with a total of 285 metabolic molecules analyzed. Validation and further analyses were conducted in Chinese MG cohorts, involving serum Cys-C measurements (60 MG patients and 60 HCs) and laboratory data review (120 MG patients and 146 HCs). Additionally, associations between serum Cys-C levels and inflammatory markers were investigated, including peripheral blood T-cell subset flow cytometry and cytokine/chemokine measurements in a subset of 25 MG patients and 25 HCs. Cys-C, Cystatin C; UKB, UK Biobank; MG, myasthenia gravis; HC, health control.