MethodsIgLON5-specific IgG1-4 levels were measured in 46 sera and 20 cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) samples from 13 HLA-subtyped anti-IgLON5 disease patients (six females, seven males) using flow cytometry. Intervals between two consecutive serum or CSF samplings (31 and 10 intervals, respectively) were categorized with regard to the immunomodulatory treatment active at the end of the interval, changes of anti-IgLON5 IgG1 and IgG4 levels, and disease severity. Intrathecal anti-IgLON5 IgG4 synthesis (IS) was assessed using a quantitative method. MethodsPatientsLongitudinal serum and CSF of 13 patients with anti-IgLON5 disease were included in this study. The samples were referred to the Division of Neuropathology and Neurochemistry at the Department of Neurology, Medical University of Vienna for diagnostic testing between October 2014 and December 2022. The clinical information was obtained by the investigators. Four patients were previously published (17–21). The disease severity was estimated as functional impairment using the modified Rankin scale (mRS) at the different sample time points.Flow cytometry analysis of IgG subclassesThe analysis of IgG subclasses was adapted from our previously published method (22, 23). Briefly, HEK293T cells were transfected with plasmid DNA encoding full-length human IgLON5 fused to Turbo GFP (tGFP, derived from Origene, Rockville, Maryland, USA, RG22549). Each 2 × 105 cells were incubated with a 1:40 dilution of patient serum or 1:10 dilution of CSF in incubation medium (DMEM supplemented with 1% penicillin/streptomycin, 1% BSA, 20mM HEPES, and 10% donkey serum) for 20 min at 4°C. The cells then were washed, fixed for 10 min using 4% paraformaldehyde, washed, and incubated with 1:500 biotinylated mouse anti-human IgG1 (B6775), IgG2 (B3398), IgG3 (B3523), or IgG4 (B3648, all by Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, Missouri, USA) in incubation medium for 30 min at 4°C. The cells were again washed, and bound biotinylated IgG was visualized by incubating cells with Cy3-streptavidin (434315, Invitrogen, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA) diluted 1:750 in incubation medium for 30 min at 4°C in the dark. The cells were washed and resuspended in phosphate-buffered saline with 2.5 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid, pH 8.0 before analysis with a Cytoflex LX flow cytometer (Beckman Coulter Brea, California, USA). tGFP-positive and -negative cells were gated, respectively, and their median fluorescence intensity (MFI) for Cy3 was measured in the phytoerythrin channel (Supplementary Methods Figure S1), the value of tGFP-negative cells was subtracted from tGFP-positive cells to account for unspecific binding of antibodies to the cells (ΔMFI). Depending on serum/CSF availability, the measurements were repeated in independent experiments (N = 1–5). Four reference samples were measured in every experiment and used to normalize the results of individual experiments (Supplementary Methods). These assay conditions resulted in a largely linear correlation of ΔMFI with antibody levels. At very high levels, ΔMFI reached the nonlinear range (Supplementary Methods). While technical limitations (the use of different subclass-specific antibodies) did not permit the calculation of absolute percentages of anti-IgLON5 IgG1, 2, 3, and 4 and total anti-IgLON5 IgG, the sum of anti-IgLON5 IgG1 + 2+3 + 4 ΔMFI was used as a surrogate marker for total anti-IgLON5 IgG (“total” anti-IgLON5 IgG), which was used to determine relative percentages of anti-IgLON5-IgG1, 2, 3, and 4. IgG4 predominance was defined as anti-IgLON5 IgG4 exceeding 66% of “total” anti-IgLON5 IgG. Anti-IgLON5 IgG4/IgG1 ratios were calculated for every sample. All analyses were made for anti-IgLON5 IgG1-4. Thus, all references to IgG1-4 always refer to anti-IgLON5 IgG1-4.Interval analysisEach interval flanked by either two subsequent serum or CSF samplings was characterized in four dimensions: (1) duration, (2) immunosuppressive treatment regimen at the end of the interval, (3) changes in disease severity, and (4) anti-IgLON5 IgG levels. We defined the following time spans for the treatment effects, which include one additional month as buffer: 4 months for intravenous immunoglobulins (IVIG) (24), 7 months for rituximab, 4 months for corticosteroids >5 mg, 5 months for cyclophosphamide, 5 months for azathioprine. For acute therapies, immunoadsorption (IA) and plasmapheresis were considered active for 1 month (Figure 1). Clinical improvement was defined as a decrease and clinical worsening as an increase in the mRS. In mildy affected patients (mRS always 1), descriptions of clinical improvements or worsening were taken into account. A >25% increase in antibody levels during the interval was defined as increased, a change of ±25% as unchanged, and >25% decrease as decreased levels. We defined IgG4/IgG1 ratio during sampling intervals as lower (>20% less), stable (0 ± 20%), or increased (>20% higher) ratios.Figure 1Graphical summary of serum and cerebral spinal fluid intervals including immunomodulatory treatments, changes in anti-IgLON5 IgG1 and IgG4 levels, as well as clinical changes. Treatments were color-coded as indicated. The last active treatment was assessed as described in the Methods sections. Two long-active treatment in parallel (with corticosteroids >5 mg/day) were categorized as combination treatment. The numbers in the columns for changes in IgG1 and IgG4 indicate the percentage change at the end of each interval compared to the start. Resp = patient responded well to rituximab 1 month after first treatment, but the interval terminated 1 week before manifestation of clinical improvement.HLA genotypingGenotyping of HLA-DRB1 and -DQB1 was performed as described (25). We used HLA-genotyping data from the 11 Austrian patients (Supplementary Table S3) and HLA data from a cohort of 200 Austrian individuals from the database of the Allele Frequency Network (26) to calculate the relative frequency of distinct HLA alleles as odds ratio (OR, Supplementary Table S4).Intrathecal IgLON5 antibody synthesisAnti-IgLON5 IgG4 IS was assessed in anti-IgLON5-disease CSF/serum pairs with routine data for the total CSF/serum IgG ratio (QIgG) and CSF/serum albumin ratio (QAlb) available. No IS of total IgG was reported for the serum/CSF pairs utilized. To calculate CSF/serum ratios, data points need to be in the absolutely linear range of the assay, and matrix effects must be absent. To generate suitable raw data, anti-IgLON5 IgG4 levels were measured in sera and CSF following dilution to identical IgG concentrations, to ensure ΔMFI intensities in a similar range in the absence of IS and strictly within the linear range of the assay (see Supplementary Methods). The CSF/serum ΔMFI intensity ratio obtained by this approach is identical to the CSF/serum antibody index (AI) as reported by Reiber and Lange (27). The CSF/serum anti-IgLON5 IgG4 ratio was then obtained by multiplying the CSF and serum ΔMFI by the respective dilution factors. Z scores for anti-IgLON5 IgG4 IS and total IgG IS were calculated as described recently (28). Control CSF/serum pairs without IS (“control AI 1,” IgLON5-antibody-negative CSF/serum pairs spiked with high-titer IgLON5-IgG4 sera to obtain a QIgLON5-IgG4 identical to the QIgG) and 10-fold IS (“control AI 10,” IgLON5-antibody-negative CSF/serum pairs spiked with high-titer IgLON5-IgG4 sera to obtain a QIgLON5-IgG4 10-fold higher than the QIgG) were used to successfully validate the assay (Supplementary Methods).Statistical analysisThe OR and 95% confidence intervals (95% CI) for individual HLA alleles of Austrian patients were calculated using Episheet1 (29). Unless stated otherwise, descriptive statistics of ordinal- and interval-scaled variables are given as median and interquartile range (IQR). The statistical analysis was done with GraphPad Prism 9.0 software, using either Fisher’s exact test, Mann–Whitney, Kruskal–Wallis test or linear regression with Pearson correlation as appropriate. Statistical significance was determined as p ≤ 0.05. Due to the low number of patients, data points and the retrospective nature, the statistical analysis had to be categorized as exploratory and merely hypothesis-generating. Consequently, a one-sided testing strategy was applied if not stated otherwise.Standard protocol approvals, registrations, and patient consentsThe study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Medical University of Vienna (EK 1442/2017, 1636/19, and 1123/15). Flow cytometry analysis of IgG subclassesThe analysis of IgG subclasses was adapted from our previously published method (22, 23). Briefly, HEK293T cells were transfected with plasmid DNA encoding full-length human IgLON5 fused to Turbo GFP (tGFP, derived from Origene, Rockville, Maryland, USA, RG22549). Each 2 × 105 cells were incubated with a 1:40 dilution of patient serum or 1:10 dilution of CSF in incubation medium (DMEM supplemented with 1% penicillin/streptomycin, 1% BSA, 20mM HEPES, and 10% donkey serum) for 20 min at 4°C. The cells then were washed, fixed for 10 min using 4% paraformaldehyde, washed, and incubated with 1:500 biotinylated mouse anti-human IgG1 (B6775), IgG2 (B3398), IgG3 (B3523), or IgG4 (B3648, all by Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, Missouri, USA) in incubation medium for 30 min at 4°C. The cells were again washed, and bound biotinylated IgG was visualized by incubating cells with Cy3-streptavidin (434315, Invitrogen, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA) diluted 1:750 in incubation medium for 30 min at 4°C in the dark. The cells were washed and resuspended in phosphate-buffered saline with 2.5 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid, pH 8.0 before analysis with a Cytoflex LX flow cytometer (Beckman Coulter Brea, California, USA). tGFP-positive and -negative cells were gated, respectively, and their median fluorescence intensity (MFI) for Cy3 was measured in the phytoerythrin channel (Supplementary Methods Figure S1), the value of tGFP-negative cells was subtracted from tGFP-positive cells to account for unspecific binding of antibodies to the cells (ΔMFI). Depending on serum/CSF availability, the measurements were repeated in independent experiments (N = 1–5). Four reference samples were measured in every experiment and used to normalize the results of individual experiments (Supplementary Methods). These assay conditions resulted in a largely linear correlation of ΔMFI with antibody levels. At very high levels, ΔMFI reached the nonlinear range (Supplementary Methods). While technical limitations (the use of different subclass-specific antibodies) did not permit the calculation of absolute percentages of anti-IgLON5 IgG1, 2, 3, and 4 and total anti-IgLON5 IgG, the sum of anti-IgLON5 IgG1 + 2+3 + 4 ΔMFI was used as a surrogate marker for total anti-IgLON5 IgG (“total” anti-IgLON5 IgG), which was used to determine relative percentages of anti-IgLON5-IgG1, 2, 3, and 4. IgG4 predominance was defined as anti-IgLON5 IgG4 exceeding 66% of “total” anti-IgLON5 IgG. Anti-IgLON5 IgG4/IgG1 ratios were calculated for every sample. All analyses were made for anti-IgLON5 IgG1-4. Thus, all references to IgG1-4 always refer to anti-IgLON5 IgG1-4. Interval analysisEach interval flanked by either two subsequent serum or CSF samplings was characterized in four dimensions: (1) duration, (2) immunosuppressive treatment regimen at the end of the interval, (3) changes in disease severity, and (4) anti-IgLON5 IgG levels. We defined the following time spans for the treatment effects, which include one additional month as buffer: 4 months for intravenous immunoglobulins (IVIG) (24), 7 months for rituximab, 4 months for corticosteroids >5 mg, 5 months for cyclophosphamide, 5 months for azathioprine. For acute therapies, immunoadsorption (IA) and plasmapheresis were considered active for 1 month (Figure 1). Clinical improvement was defined as a decrease and clinical worsening as an increase in the mRS. In mildy affected patients (mRS always 1), descriptions of clinical improvements or worsening were taken into account. A >25% increase in antibody levels during the interval was defined as increased, a change of ±25% as unchanged, and >25% decrease as decreased levels. We defined IgG4/IgG1 ratio during sampling intervals as lower (>20% less), stable (0 ± 20%), or increased (>20% higher) ratios.Figure 1Graphical summary of serum and cerebral spinal fluid intervals including immunomodulatory treatments, changes in anti-IgLON5 IgG1 and IgG4 levels, as well as clinical changes. Treatments were color-coded as indicated. The last active treatment was assessed as described in the Methods sections. Two long-active treatment in parallel (with corticosteroids >5 mg/day) were categorized as combination treatment. The numbers in the columns for changes in IgG1 and IgG4 indicate the percentage change at the end of each interval compared to the start. Resp = patient responded well to rituximab 1 month after first treatment, but the interval terminated 1 week before manifestation of clinical improvement. Statistical analysisThe OR and 95% confidence intervals (95% CI) for individual HLA alleles of Austrian patients were calculated using Episheet1 (29). Unless stated otherwise, descriptive statistics of ordinal- and interval-scaled variables are given as median and interquartile range (IQR). The statistical analysis was done with GraphPad Prism 9.0 software, using either Fisher’s exact test, Mann–Whitney, Kruskal–Wallis test or linear regression with Pearson correlation as appropriate. Statistical significance was determined as p ≤ 0.05. Due to the low number of patients, data points and the retrospective nature, the statistical analysis had to be categorized as exploratory and merely hypothesis-generating. Consequently, a one-sided testing strategy was applied if not stated otherwise. Supplementary materialThe Supplementary Material for this article can be found online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fimmu.2024.1376456/full#supplementary-material