DiscussionWe speculate that the higher release of EVs containing CD29, CD31, CD40, CD44, CD49c, and CD69 in plasma, at low levels of circulating NfL/GFAP, may be associated with reduced immune cell activity in RRMS. These EV markers may characterize patients with RRMS in disease stabilization. DiscussionIn this study, we analyzed the concentration, size, and specific molecular markers of EVs in RRMS, NMOSD, and MOGAD plasma samples to potentially identify disease-specific biomarkers. Compared with HCs, we observed a decrease in EV density and an increase in size in the RRMS group, whereas only an increase in mean EV size was detected in NMOSD and MOGAD groups. The level of a subset of immune cell–related EV markers was negatively correlated with the blood concentration of NfL and GFAP in RRMS, suggesting an association with disease activity in RRMS, but not in NMOSD and MOGAD. In addition, treatments did not significantly influence the amount and composition of RRMS-EVs. Our results suggest that some EV markers may specifically be associated with neuronal damage in RRMS.NfL and GFAP are considered as potential surrogate biomarkers of neuronal damage and disease activity in demyelinating diseases of the CNS.4 These 2 proteins are released in the blood circulation after neuronal lesion and astrogliosis. Therefore, the increased levels of GFAP and NfL that we found in this study suggest prominent axonal damage and gliosis in RRMS, consistent with what has been reported by others.4,5,25 By contrast, NMOSD samples only showed an increase in GFAP z-scores, attributable to the astrocytopathy characterizing this disease.25 No significant differences were observed in the MOGAD group relative to HCs. Other studies showed higher levels of NfL in the NMOSD group and NfL and GFAP in patients with MOGAD than in HCs.7 These differences with us may come from the sample size; the relatively smaller sample size of our study, in particular for the NMOSD and MOGAD groups, may limit the observation of statistical differences. In any case, the detection of NfL and GFAP in plasma seems useful to follow disease activity but does not allow us to discriminate diseases from each other.6,7 For this reason, plasma NfL and GFAP were used as biomarkers of disease activity to understand the changes occurring for EVs.EVs isolated from RRMS plasma were less abundant but bigger on average than from HC plasma. The reduction in EV number seems to affect the whole spectrum of particle sizes, suggesting the involvement of mechanisms controlling nonselectively microparticle and exosome shedding. Of interest, NMOSD and MOGAD samples only showed a size increase. Particle size distribution analysis suggests that EVs larger than 150 nm may predominantly contribute to this effect. From this observation, it is tempting to propose that exosomes, whose diameters comprised between 50 nm and 150 nm, are less likely to account for this change. However, the overlapping sizes of exosomes and microparticles (50–500 nm) do not allow to draw such a clear conclusion.22 Morphometric measurements are not informative on the subtypes of EVs released and on the underlying biogenesis mechanisms that may be altered. Moreover, although more quantitative, tetraspanin-based ExoView measurements do not allow us to differentiate exosomes from microparticles. Indeed, CD81, CD63, and CD9 tetraspanins are no longer considered as strict exosomal markers. The surface of microparticles can exhibit the same tetraspanins.27 Therefore, the limitations of NTA and ExoView prompted us to undertake an extended analysis of EV markers by MACSPlex/flow cytometry.The examination of immune cell–specific EV markers revealed significant correlations with the levels of NfL and GFAP present in plasma and the time elapsed since the last relapse. In fact, a limited number of EV markers decreased as the plasma concentration of NfL or GFAP increased, suggesting a negative correlation with disease activity in patients with RRMS but not in other groups. In particular, a decline in the levels of CD31, CD40, CD44, CD49c, and CD69 was observed for increasing concentrations of NfL. Similarly, lower levels of CD44 and CD69 were associated with higher concentrations of GFAP in plasma. At low NfL and GFAP concentrations, the increased levels of some EV markers (e.g., CD31 and CD44) in patients with RRMS, above those detected in other patient groups, suggest that the correlations described in RRMS are attributable to EV marker enrichment when disease activity is weak. The function of these EVs enriched in specific markers is not clear. Nevertheless, we speculate that the release of CD31-positive and CD69-positive EVs may be associated with remission because they increased with the time elapsed since the last relapse and they were higher when NfL and/or GFAP levels were relatively low. Still, the biological function of CD31-positive or CD69-positive EVs in the pathologic mechanisms of RRMS is elusive. CD31 has been involved in leukocyte extravasation and in BBB permeability.28,29 The upregulation of this protein might reflect an attempt at restoring the BBB integrity.29 However, it is important to distinguish the effect that plasma membrane proteins may have in cells from the physiologic consequences of their increase in EVs. In fact, the release of EVs is a mechanism that can induce a cell loss of function by reducing the amount of plasma membrane proteins. Indeed, for example, the release of EVs mediates the complete elimination of transferrin receptor 1 from the plasma membrane of reticulocytes during their maturation into red blood cells.30 This mechanism may explain why increased levels of CD31 and other EV markers are associated with low concentrations of NfL and GFAP. One may thus speculate that the release of EVs with CD29, CD31, and CD49c, which are proteins involved in leukocyte extravasation, might coincide with a reduction in CNS infiltration by immune cells.28,31 The same reasoning may apply to CD69 and CD44 that are highly expressed in the T cells of active MS lesions.32 The potential removal of CD40 at the surface of antigen-presenting cells may dampen cell differentiation and regulate the immune response.33,34 Inversely, low levels of CD29, CD31, and CD44 in EVs have been associated with systemic inflammation in polytrauma patients.35 Whether the secretion of EVs enriched in CD29, CD31, CD40, CD44, CD49c, and CD69 is a mechanism reducing leukocyte activation in the periphery and protecting the BBB in MS deserves further investigation.The fact that the levels of EV markers did not significantly vary in patients receiving natalizumab compared with other treatments suggests that EV changes are independent of treatments, even if potential treatment effects cannot be completely ruled out. For example, by inhibiting T-cell infiltration into the CNS, natalizumab may induce peripheral T-cell accumulation and increased EV shedding.36 Indeed, we observed that the number of lymphocytes was doubled in the blood of patients with MS receiving natalizumab in comparison with those treated with dimethylfumarate or left untreated (data not shown). In addition, in the NMOSD and MOGAD groups, cell-depleting treatments may result in reduced T-cell–derived EV release. However, our current data rather support a disease-specific enrichment of T-cell EV markers in RRMS.37In this study, we use a combination of standard methods such as NTA and advanced EV marker-based analytic methods such as SP-IRIS (ExoView). Of interest, a lower level of EVs was shown in patients with RRMS by NTA but not by SP-IRIS. Therefore, further studies are necessary to confirm the EV density difference. In addition, technical limitations and differences between NTA and SP-IRIS should be taken into consideration. Particle levels reported by NTA were approximately 1–2-fold higher than those of SP-IRIS. In addition, NTA allows us to measure a wider range of EV diameters than SP-IRIS. NTA tends to overestimate both concentration and size, in comparison with SP-IRIS and transmission electron microscopy,38 because clusters of contaminants or EVs are also measured by NTA.39 The 2 methods are technologically different: NTA is based on the movement of particles in solution40 while SP-IRIS allows fluorescence measurement of immunocaptured EVs.41 Consequently, NTA detects all particles in the solution within the range of measurement (approximately 60–1,000 nm) while SP-IRIS only enables measurement of particles with CD9, CD63, or CD81. In addition, EVs were isolated by SEC from plasma before NTA, whereas crude plasma was used for SP-IRIS, an approach that may limit the loss of EVs.42 In summary, in the growing field of EVs, caution should be exerted with the interpretation of results showing variations in the composition or density of EVs when using a limited number of methods.21,39In this study, the analyses of EVs in the plasma of patients revealed specific changes in the levels of the EV surface markers CD29, CD31, CD40, CD44, CD49c, and CD60 in association with the time elapsed since the last relapse and the concentrations of NfL and GFAP in patients with RRMS. We hypothesize that the secretion of EVs may influence the activation state of immune cells in the periphery, although a different cell origin (e.g., CNS origin) of EVs cannot be ruled out. EVs represent a source of potential markers whose functional characterization may allow us to improve the monitoring of MS.