Methods42 patients with veSSc, defined as the presence of Raynaud’s phenomenon and at least one of puffy fingers, positive antinuclear antibodies or pathological nailfold capillaroscopy, not meeting the 2013 American College of Rheumatology/European Alliance of Associations for Rheumatology classification criteria for SSc, were compared with healthy controls (HCs, n=29). ECM degradation (BGM, C3M, C4M and C6M) and ECM formation biomarkers (PRO-C3, PRO-C4 and PRO-C5) were measured in serum using ELISAs. A cross-sectional analysis at baseline and a longitudinal analysis was performed. Patients and methodsWe included patients with veSSc, defined as the presence of Raynaud’s phenomenon and at least one other possible manifestation of SSc (puffy fingers, positive ANAs, pathological capillaroscopy), but who did not meet the 2013 American College of Rheumatology/European Alliance of Associations for Rheumatology (ACR/EULAR) classification criteria for SSc10 and did not have any clinical evidence for skin fibrosis (modified Rodnan skin score of 0/51 points) and interstitial lung disease (ILD, by high-resolution CT of the chest). Patients with a baseline visit to our centre from 2011 to 2014 and serum samples at baseline were included. Medical data and biobanking samples were collected and processed by European Scleroderma Trials and Research standards.11 12 Healthy control (HC) volunteers from Zurich were included. This HC cohort has been described and results for ECM epitopes have been shown in a prior paper from our group.9 Candidate biomarkers (ECM neoepitopes) were selected by expert opinion (OD, RD, SJ, BM, MAK, A-CB-J, ASS and PJ) considering the most relevant collagens in fibrosis. These markers, generated by cleavage of procollagens or mature collagens in processes of formation or degradation, were measured by validated ELISA-assays in serum.13–16 Measurements were performed in duplicate and were blinded. The formation markers were: PRO-C3 (the N-terminal propeptide of type III collagen), PRO-C4 (the N-terminal propeptide of type IV collagen) and PRO-C5 (the C-terminal propeptide of type V collagen). The degradation markers were C3M (peptide of type III collagen from degradation by matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-9), C4M (peptide of type IV collagen from degradation by MMP-2, MMP-9 and MMP-12), C6M (peptide of type VI collagen from degradation by MMP-2 and MMP-9) and BGM (peptide of biglycan from degradation by MMP-2 and MMP-12).In addition to the individual collagen neoepitopes, the ratios between the formation and degradation markers of collagens type III and IV were analysed as surrogate biomarkers of collagen turnover. Statistical analysisNormally distributed data are shown as mean±SD, non-normally distributed data as median and IQR. The biomarker graphics display the SE of the mean (SEM). Differences between groups were compared by the Mann-Whitney U test and correlations by Spearman’s test. Categorical variables were compared by χ2 or Fisher’s exact test. Bonferroni correction for multiple tests was applied. Biomarkers were investigated for sensitivity and specificity by Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve. A predictive analysis using Cox logistic regression was also performed. Missing data were reported as observed. The analyses and graphical illustration were performed using IBM SPSS Statistics V.29.0 and GraphPad Prism V.8.