ConclusionsThis treatment was well tolerated as only two SAEs occurred (during the treatment phase) and only two AEs were reported since 2021. We demonstrate that this therapeutic approach has merit, is durable, and should be explored in a larger clinical trial. 3DISCUSSIONWe have shown that LV‐mediated gene therapy employing autologous, peripheral blood‐mobilised CD34+ HSPCs with non‐myeloablative conditioning is a safe treatment modality in a Phase 1 cohort of five male Fabry disease patients. Importantly, our high‐titre vector preparation and reasonable multiplicity‐of‐infection allowed us to treat all five patients with the same good manufacturing practice‐grade batch of recombinant LV. This helped to considerably reduce costs and logistical complexity. After reduced‐intensity melphalan treatment, all patients engrafted their autologous modified α‐gal A expressing cells. Importantly, all patients synthesised and secreted α‐gal A throughout the course of the study. Expression of α‐gal A resulted in a decrease in plasma lyso‐Gb3 in four of five patients and stabilisation of kidney symptoms in all patients. This gene therapy approach is safe as only two SAEs were described throughout the course of this 5‐year study. 11 Throughout the long‐term follow‐up interval of 5 years, there were no AEs of any grade attributable to the cellular gene therapy intervention or host conditioning. We demonstrate that this therapeutic approach has merit, is durable and should be explored in a larger clinical trial. While this study treated only five male Fabry patients, the fact that all five treated patients responded positively to the gene therapy bodes well for outcomes in a larger study.All five patients synthesised and secreted α‐gal A throughout this study. Plasma α‐gal A was below the reference range in four of five patients. Similarly, three of five patients had leukocyte α‐gal A‐specific activity below the reference range. Patient 2 had leukocyte α‐gal A‐specific activity within the reference range. Plasma and leukocyte α‐gal A enzyme activity remained above the reference range in Patient 5 throughout this clinical trial. Previous model system studies showed no adverse effects of supraphysiological α‐gal A expression in transgenic mice. 23 , 24 The elevated expression of α‐gal A in Patient 5 will continue to be monitored in our subsequent long‐term follow‐up study, but is not now a point of clinical concern. The low, but durable level of α‐gal A synthesis and secretion observed in Patient 1 is still effective in the reduction of plasma lyso‐Gb3. Interestingly, this patient continued to have reduced urinary protein throughout the trial, resulting in a positive eGFR slope of .09. All five patients qualified to cease their ET therapy and three of five elected to do so.This was a safety study and not powered to evaluate the correlation between gene therapy and any specific clinical parameters. We showed stable and prolonged expression of LV‐transduced cells with no evidence of formation of anti‐α‐gal A antibodies, beyond 18 months post‐transplant. In addition, all patients are clinically healthy. Not all patients showed the same responses in catabolites but work equating specific biomarkers and clinical outcomes in Fabry disease is still in its early stages. This is also evident from the lack of LGE advancement in any patient despite some increases in troponin levels and stabilisation of proteinuria despite a rise in urine Gb3 in Patient 1. While Patient 1 developed intermittent atrial fibrillation with an atrial thrombus, paroxysmal atrial fibrillation can be seen in 13.3% of males with Fabry disease with a mean age of presentation of 67 ± 11 years suggesting that prevalence increases with age. 25 , 26 Success of haematopoietic cell‐based gene therapy requires conditioning with a chemotherapeutic agent to allow efficient engraftment of engineered autologous cells. 27 Since we were treating a chronic LSD, for which ET is the current standard‐of‐care, we elected to use a reduced dosage of melphalan, opting for partial ablation. We were also cognizant that metabolic cooperativity or cross‐correction in LSDs like Fabry disease may decrease the threshold for α‐gal A activity needed. 15 , 28 We reasoned that this reduced‐intensity conditioning approach would lead to fewer SAEs, which would be better tolerated by patients and allow the gene therapy to be administered as an out‐patient procedure. Polyclonal reconstitution was observed in all patients up to 18 months post‐infusion. 13 This therapy was delivered in an out‐patient manner for four of five patients; one patient was kept overnight by the hospital for observation.Busulfan is the current chemotherapeutic agent of choice for haematopoietic cell‐based gene therapy treatment of paediatric autoimmune and malignant diseases with fatal outcome. 27 , 29 , 30 , 31 , 32 , 33 , 34 Delivery of busulfan must be closely monitored and use of this agent for full ablation requires intensive care unit (ICU) admittance. Busulfan is known to cause seizures in recipients 35 and its use can lead to long‐term gonadal toxicities 36 along with an increased risk of secondary malignancies. 37 , 38 , 39 While a stronger myeloablation regimen has been used in malignant haematopoietic diseases, we hypothesised that for a metabolic disease, stronger myeloablation with an autologous transplant was unnecessary since even partial improvements in enzyme levels may be sufficient to displace the requirement of ET. Our results support the hypothesis that high‐dose chemotherapy conditioning regimens may not always be necessary in autologous lentiviral‐based gene therapy.Plasma Gb3 levels decreased in all five patients on ET, from years 1 to 5. However, these differences were not statistically significant. While elevated plasma Gb3 is useful for diagnosis of Fabry disease, it does not seem to be informative as a biomarker with ET treatment or chaperone therapy. 40 , 41 Higher serum lyso‐Gb3 levels were shown to be independently associated with serum creatinine and cardiomyopathy in a cohort of 69 Fabry disease patients, including 28 males. 22 In a follow‐up report, plasma lyso‐Gb3 was also demonstrated to be a factor associated with adverse clinical outcomes in a long‐term study of 26 male and 40 female Fabry disease patients. 21 Plasma lyso‐Gb3 was significantly lower in Patients 1–3 and 5 in our FACTs trial. Post‐treatment plasma lyso‐Gb3 from years 1 to 5 was elevated compared to pre‐treatment values in Patient 4. Further characterisation of plasma lyso‐Gb3 in Patient 4 revealed that this metabolite increased 23% compared to baseline during years 1–5 of follow‐up post‐therapy, however, urinary protein in Patient 4 remained in the reference range and eGFR was indicative of Type I chronic kidney disease. This subject has daily urinary protein secretion near the upper limit of the reference range (.15 g/day; slope = .003) and an eGFR slope of −1.80. Given the proposed clinical importance of elevated plasma lyso‐Gb3, this patient is a candidate to resume ET in the near future.Interestingly, we observed that urine Gb3 levels rose in all three patients that paused ET (Supporting Information Figure 9). The reason(s) underscoring this observation are unclear. Increases in urine Gb3 have been observed either as a consequence of decreased ET dosage or the emergence of anti‐α‐gal A antibodies for patients on ET therapy. 42 No increases in anti‐agalsidase antibody activity were observed in any patient (Figure 6), suggesting that the increased urine Gb3 was associated with the low, but detectable α‐gal A enzyme produced by these three patients. Despite the rise in urine Gb3, kidney function remained normal in all three patients that paused ET with eGFR exceeding 75 in each and decreases observed in urinary protein secretion in Patients 1 and 3. In contrast, statistically significant decreases in pre‐ and post‐treatment urine Gb3 and urine lyso‐Gb3 were observed in Patients 2 and 5. Both of these patients remained on ET after the stem cell transplantation. Collectively, these data suggest that biweekly ET infusion is useful for decreasing these catabolites, however, the absolute lowest levels are achieved by the combination therapy; with the gene therapy continuously supplying α‐gal A to each patient.We examined whether there were correlations in enzyme activity, VCN, Gb3 metabolites, stem cell dosage at infusion and age at transplant, with a selected cut‐off of R 2 > .80. Plasma α‐gal A, leukocyte α‐gal A and VCN were highly correlated. Plasma α‐gal A and VCN correlate to age at transplant. There were no correlations of enzyme or VCN with Gb3 or lyso‐Gb3 in plasma or urine, underscoring the challenges of using these measures as bone fide Fabry disease biomarkers.This was the first gene therapy clinical trial to be completed for Fabry disease. 11 , 13 In addition to existing gene therapy protocols, there is the potential to examine other means of introducing α‐gal A into circulation and then into target cells. Our group has recently shown that Fabry patient T cells can be appropriate targets for implementing therapy, utilising our LV‐based protocol. 43 These autologous cells can be collected easily, expanded, transduced and infused multiple times as needed in out‐patient procedures. The transduced T cells distribute the enzyme systemically throughout the body. Transduced T cells can also be long‐lived in the body and take up residence at key sites. We have shown that analogous vector‐transduced T cells may also be effective for other LSDs, including Gaucher, Farber and Pompe diseases. 43 This concept of an alternate autologous cell source is especially timely given how adept transplant groups have become at collecting, transducing and expanding T cells for chimeric antigen receptor (CAR‐T)‐based cancer trials. Furthermore, implementation of an autologous T cell‐based gene therapy protocol to treat eligible Fabry patients may cost even less than the HSPC‐based protocol we used here.Preclinical testing of AAV vector backbones to deliver GLA cDNA has been reported. 44 , 45 These studies have led to the development of clinical trials (NCT04046224 and NCT040400409), although the latter trial has been terminated. Two additional groups are also utilising analogous AAV vectors to introduce the GLA cDNA into Fabry patients (NCT04519749 and NCT06270316).In summary, we have shown that utilising LV‐mediated gene therapy targeting HSPCs is a safe and efficacious means of treating Fabry disease. Five males with four distinct classical Fabry disease mutations were selected to participate in this clinical trial. Gene therapy was well tolerated with only two SAEs documented to date. All five patients were eligible to pause ET and three patients elected to do so. Compellingly, we estimate that pausing ET in these three patients alone has led to a savings of $4.8 million dollars to the Canadian health care system at the time of the last patient visit of Patient 5. This cost saving continues to increase daily as all five patients are now in long‐term follow‐up for 15 years. These data also demonstrate that our LV‐mediated approach can be successfully performed in an academic setting. Our multi‐site model illustrates that cells can be collected at one site, isolated and enriched at another, transduced at a third site and shipped back to the origin for infusions into patients. We have demonstrated that assays can also be performed at multiple locations. Canada has the ability to incorporate such true experimental, ‘bench‐to‐bedside’ approaches directly into the national health care system. There is already an example of such cooperative studies in Canada for individualised CAR‐T cells engineered against CD19+ cancers. 46 Another approach would be to form an alliance of University hospitals to manufacture gene therapies, as has been done in Switzerland. 47 Collectively, can the lessons learned from CAR‐T cell therapies for treating cancer, for example, be applied to rare diseases including LSDs such as Fabry disease? Future clinical trials in this area would aim to expand the patient cohort examined in this study as well as include female Fabry disease patients and younger male subjects.