BackgroundAnti-IgLON5 disease is a rare chronic autoimmune disorder characterized by IgLON5 autoantibodies predominantly of the IgG4 subclass. Distinct pathogenic effects were described for anti-IgLON5 IgG1 and IgG4, however, with uncertain clinical relevance. IntroductionAnti-IgLON5 disease is a rare chronic autoimmune disorder hallmarked by antineuronal surface autoantibodies against IgLON5, an immunoglobulin superfamily cell-adhesion molecule with high expression in the central nervous system (CNS). The clinical presentation of anti-IgLON5 disease is quite heterogeneous with patients presenting with distinct rapid eye movement (REM) and non-REM parasomnias, obstructive sleep apnea and stridor, variable features of gait instability, movement disorders, and brainstem symptoms (1). Anti-IgLON5 disease is typically chronically progressive. Depending on which symptoms predominate, four different phenotypes have been delineated which are dominated by either (1): the sleep disorder with parasomnia and sleep apnea (2); bulbar dysfunction with dysarthria, dysphagia, sialorrhea, stridor, or acute respiratory insufficiency (3); a progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP)–like movement disorder; or (4) cognitive decline (1). Rare phenotypes mimic motor neuron disease or acute encephalitis (2, 3). The typically insidious clinical course and neuronal tau aggregates predominantly involving the brainstem and hypothalamus (4) suggest an underlying neurodegenerative process. However, tauopathy may be absent in some patients (5). In turn, a strong association with HLA-DRB1*10:01 and HLA-DQB1*05:01 alleles and the observations that IgLON5-specific IgG1 may cause IgLON5 protein internalization and subsequent cytoskeletal changes in vitro (6) point to a primary autoimmune process. Indeed, patients with anti-IgLON5 disease may benefit from early immunotherapy (7). The anti-IgLON5 antibodies are predominantly of the IgG4 subclass (followed by IgG1) in most patients (4). Anti-IgLON5 IgG1 induced irreversible IgLON5 internalization (8), whereas IgG4 interfered with IgLON5 protein interactions (9) in vitro. However, their individual contributions to disease in vivo and their prognostic/predictive relevance remain unclear.Autoimmune encephalitis (AIE) with neuronal surface autoantibodies are heterogenous (10) but may be grouped according to the IgG1 or IgG4 predominance of their target-specific antineuronal antibodies (10). CSF inflammation in IgG4-predominant AIEs is typically less prominent than in IgG1-predominant AIEs (11). AIE associated with NMDAR antibodies is a prototypical IgG1-predominant AIE. Herein, prominent intrathecal synthesis (IS) of the total and target-specific IgG is well established (12). Surprisingly, in LGI1-antibody AIE (which is the most common IgG4-associated AIE), the otherwise non-inflammatory CSF contains many target-specific B cells. B cells and plasma cells also occur frequently in the largely non-inflammatory CSF in anti-IgLON5 disease (13, 14). Thus, target-specific IgG IS may also play a role in IgG4-predominant autoimmune disorders, including anti-IgLON5 disease. Of note, antigen-specific IgG IS is much more difficult to target therapeutically than systemic antibody production (15, 16).Here, we longitudinally investigate the changes in individual anti-IgLON5 IgG subclass profiles in serum and CSF of 13 anti-IgLON5 disease patients in association with short- and long-term treatment follow-up. In addition, we established a method to quantify IS of anti-IgLON5 IgG4. Our aim was to delineate factors contributing to disease progression and characterize candidate biomarkers for therapeutic response.