This study aimed to assess the prevalence of HDV (hepatitis delta virus), HCV (hepatitis C virus), and HIV (human immunodeficiency virus) coinfections among HBsAg-positive patients and to determine the severity of liver fibrosis and biochemical markers. Furthermore, the study sought to evaluate the noninvasive fibrosis scores (APRI and FIB4) in predicting the severity of liver disease in patients with hepatitis B. A retrospective analysis of 1434 patients with chronic HBV admitted between January 2020 and December 2024 was conducted at Sincan Tertiary Hospital. The positivity rates of the following antibodies were the focus of the study: anti-HDV, anti-HCV, and anti-HIV. In addition to these, the levels of HIV-RNA, HCV-RNA and HBV-DNA, as well as several biochemical markers (ALT, AST, INR, albumin, bilirubin and platelet count) were also evaluated. The APRI and FIB-4 scores were calculated. Of the 1434 patients, 49 (3.4%) tested positive for anti-HDV, 784 were screened for anti-HCV, and 749 were screened for anti-HIV. The positivity rates were 3.4% (27/784) and 3.4% (26/749), respectively. According to ROC analysis, the FIB-4 score had a statistically significant effect on predicting anti-HDV negativity (AUC = 0.59, p = 0.031). However, the APRI score was not a significant predictor for anti-HDV positivity (AUC = 0.53, p > 0.05). APRI and FIB-4 scores did not have a statistically significant discriminatory power in predicting anti-HCV and anti-HIV positivity (p > 0.05). The cut-off value for the FIB-4 score in predicting anti-HDV positivity was 1.72, with a sensitivity of 61.4% and a specificity of 42.9% (p = 0.031). Among the HCV/RNA-positive patients (n = 5), all were male, and two also had positive anti-HBe results with undetectable HBV/DNA levels. One HIV/RNA-positive patient, a foreign national, was confirmed to have HIV/HBV/HDV infection. All HBsAg-positive patients should undergo routine anti-HDV testing. Vaccination programmes are vital in preventing the spread of HDV. Dual screening strategies are essential for identifying infected individuals and developing prevention and treatment programmes. Anti-HDV positivity indicates advanced liver fibrosis, emphasising the importance of screening and monitoring. However, the limited accuracy of the APRI and FIB-4 scores for detecting coinfections highlights the need to integrate noninvasive methods with molecular diagnostics for precise management.