MethodsOverviewThe phase 2b component of POSIBIL6ESKD was a parallel-group, double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial conducted at 56 sites in the United States, Canada, Belgium, Germany and Australia (ClinicalTrials.gov registration: NCT05485961). A global executive committee and independent data monitoring committee (IDMC) approved the protocol and reviewed progress, quality and safety during trial conduct. Ethics Committees and Institutional Review Boards affiliated with each site approved the protocol. All participants provided written informed consent.Study participantsPatients aged 18 years or older receiving treatment with dialysis for 12 or more weeks with a diagnosis of cardiovascular disease and/or diabetes were eligible for screening. hs-CRP ≥ 2 mg l−1 measured by a central laboratory was necessary for enrollment. Exclusion criteria included positive tests for human immunodeficiency virus antibody, hepatitis B surface antigen, hepatitis C or tuberculosis using an interferon-gamma release assay, or diagnosis of a clinically significant infection within 14 days of screening; laboratory abnormalities such as neutropenia, thrombocytopenia or marked elevation of liver enzymes; recent history (<90 days) of myocardial infarction, or acute decompensated heart failure, or planned major surgery including kidney transplant; history suggestive of high risk of gastrointestinal perforation; or chronic use of immunosuppressants (full list of inclusion and exclusion criteria are included in the Supplementary Information). Eligible patients were randomly allocated in a 1:1:1:1 ratio to placebo or clazakizumab at doses of 2.5 mg, 5 mg or 10 mg. Randomization was stratified by hs-CRP 2–6 mg l−1 or >6 mg l−1 at screening to minimize the possibility of an imbalance in baseline hs-CRP across groups. All participants and investigators were blinded to treatment assignment.ProceduresStudy drug, including placebo, was administered every 4 weeks as a 3-min intravenous bolus using the return venous line of the hemodialysis circuit, beginning at least 1 h after the start and no later than 1 h before completion of the dialysis session. The minimum duration of the treatment period was 12 weeks (three doses), and participants could continue to receive treatment every 4 weeks for up to six doses and followed until the last randomized participant received the third dose of the study drug, which triggered the end of the study. Thus, all patients were expected to complete the 12-week treatment period, while some patients could go on to receive treatment for up to 24 weeks to determine whether the effects were sustained longer-term and to gather additional safety information. An end-of-treatment visit occurred 4 weeks after the last dose of the study drug was received, and a safety follow-up occurred 8 weeks after (Extended Data Fig. 2).Efficacy outcomesThe prespecified primary efficacy outcome was the change from baseline to week 12 in serum hs-CRP, expressed as the GMR. Prespecified secondary efficacy outcomes included the following: (1) the proportion of patients who achieved hs-CRP < 2 mg l−1 at week 12; (2) change from baseline to week 12 in downstream biomarkers of IL-6 activity, including serum amyloid A, lipoprotein(a), fibrinogen, secretory phospholipase A2, hemoglobin, ferritin, iron, transferrin saturation and hepcidin; and (3) change from baseline to week 12 in serum albumin, a negative acute phase reactant routinely measured in patients receiving maintenance hemodialysis.Safety assessmentPatients were assessed for treatment-emergent adverse and serious adverse events throughout the 12- to 24-week treatment period and 8-week safety follow-up. Laboratory parameters to evaluate the safety of clazakizumab included measures of alanine aminotransferase, aspartate aminotransferase, lipid parameters and complete blood count. Laboratory measures were assessed in a central core facility (Medpace Reference Laboratories).Sample sizeBased on experience from previous clinical trials in patients with other inflammatory diseases, we determined that a sample size of 30 participants per group (120 in total) would provide >97% power to detect an 80% reduction (GMR to placebo of 0.2, equal to −1.61 on the log scale) in hs-CRP comparing clazakizumab relative to placebo, assuming one-sided α of 0.025/3 to conservatively reflect multiple comparison adjustment. We assumed a s.d. of 1.4 for change from baseline on the log scale.Statistical analysisThe prespecified analysis data sets included a PP analysis set, mITT analysis set and safety analysis set. The mITT analysis set consists of all patients who were randomized and received any treatment. The PP analysis set consists of all patients in the mITT analysis set with no major intercurrent event potentially affecting the primary endpoint, such as death or treatment discontinuation before week 12. The safety analysis set consists of all patients who received any amount of investigational product. The prespecified primary analysis for hs-CRP used the PP analysis set to best estimate the pharmacological effect of clazakizumab, and a supplemental analysis used the mITT analysis set. Secondary endpoints were analyzed using the mITT analysis set.To reduce variation in baseline values and mitigate misclassification, we considered the average of screening and baseline serum hs-CRP concentrations as the baseline value. For the primary efficacy outcome, we used a mixed model for repeated measures (MMRM), analyzing the change from baseline in hs-CRP on the log scale through week 24. The week 12 GMRs to placebo were expressed as the percentage difference relative to placebo. The MMRM model included terms for treatment, baseline, visit (as a categorical factor) and interactions between visit and each of the other model terms; an unstructured variance–covariance matrix was used. T tests from the MMRM model were used to calculate P values. For downstream markers of IL-6 activity, we analyzed the change (or log-transformed change for nonnormally distributed measures) from baseline using the same MMRM analysis as for hs-CRP, but including a factor for hs-CRP stratum (≤6 mg l−1 and >6 mg l−1). The primary analysis was based on the PP analysis set. Other analyses were based on the mITT analysis set. We considered two-sided P values < 0.05 to be statistically significant, without consideration of multiplicity. We conducted all analyses using SAS version 9.4 (SAS Institute). Results of the primary efficacy analysis were independently verified and confirmed by the Stanford Quantitative Sciences Center (Stanford University).Reporting summaryFurther information on research design is available in the Nature Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article. Study participantsPatients aged 18 years or older receiving treatment with dialysis for 12 or more weeks with a diagnosis of cardiovascular disease and/or diabetes were eligible for screening. hs-CRP ≥ 2 mg l−1 measured by a central laboratory was necessary for enrollment. Exclusion criteria included positive tests for human immunodeficiency virus antibody, hepatitis B surface antigen, hepatitis C or tuberculosis using an interferon-gamma release assay, or diagnosis of a clinically significant infection within 14 days of screening; laboratory abnormalities such as neutropenia, thrombocytopenia or marked elevation of liver enzymes; recent history (<90 days) of myocardial infarction, or acute decompensated heart failure, or planned major surgery including kidney transplant; history suggestive of high risk of gastrointestinal perforation; or chronic use of immunosuppressants (full list of inclusion and exclusion criteria are included in the Supplementary Information). Eligible patients were randomly allocated in a 1:1:1:1 ratio to placebo or clazakizumab at doses of 2.5 mg, 5 mg or 10 mg. Randomization was stratified by hs-CRP 2–6 mg l−1 or >6 mg l−1 at screening to minimize the possibility of an imbalance in baseline hs-CRP across groups. All participants and investigators were blinded to treatment assignment. ProceduresStudy drug, including placebo, was administered every 4 weeks as a 3-min intravenous bolus using the return venous line of the hemodialysis circuit, beginning at least 1 h after the start and no later than 1 h before completion of the dialysis session. The minimum duration of the treatment period was 12 weeks (three doses), and participants could continue to receive treatment every 4 weeks for up to six doses and followed until the last randomized participant received the third dose of the study drug, which triggered the end of the study. Thus, all patients were expected to complete the 12-week treatment period, while some patients could go on to receive treatment for up to 24 weeks to determine whether the effects were sustained longer-term and to gather additional safety information. An end-of-treatment visit occurred 4 weeks after the last dose of the study drug was received, and a safety follow-up occurred 8 weeks after (Extended Data Fig. 2). Statistical analysisThe prespecified analysis data sets included a PP analysis set, mITT analysis set and safety analysis set. The mITT analysis set consists of all patients who were randomized and received any treatment. The PP analysis set consists of all patients in the mITT analysis set with no major intercurrent event potentially affecting the primary endpoint, such as death or treatment discontinuation before week 12. The safety analysis set consists of all patients who received any amount of investigational product. The prespecified primary analysis for hs-CRP used the PP analysis set to best estimate the pharmacological effect of clazakizumab, and a supplemental analysis used the mITT analysis set. Secondary endpoints were analyzed using the mITT analysis set.To reduce variation in baseline values and mitigate misclassification, we considered the average of screening and baseline serum hs-CRP concentrations as the baseline value. For the primary efficacy outcome, we used a mixed model for repeated measures (MMRM), analyzing the change from baseline in hs-CRP on the log scale through week 24. The week 12 GMRs to placebo were expressed as the percentage difference relative to placebo. The MMRM model included terms for treatment, baseline, visit (as a categorical factor) and interactions between visit and each of the other model terms; an unstructured variance–covariance matrix was used. T tests from the MMRM model were used to calculate P values. For downstream markers of IL-6 activity, we analyzed the change (or log-transformed change for nonnormally distributed measures) from baseline using the same MMRM analysis as for hs-CRP, but including a factor for hs-CRP stratum (≤6 mg l−1 and >6 mg l−1). The primary analysis was based on the PP analysis set. Other analyses were based on the mITT analysis set. We considered two-sided P values < 0.05 to be statistically significant, without consideration of multiplicity. We conducted all analyses using SAS version 9.4 (SAS Institute). Results of the primary efficacy analysis were independently verified and confirmed by the Stanford Quantitative Sciences Center (Stanford University). Online contentAny methods, additional references, Nature Portfolio reporting summaries, source data, extended data, supplementary information, acknowledgements, peer review information; details of author contributions and competing interests; and statements of data and code availability are available at 10.1038/s41591-024-03043-1.