IntroductionAnti-melanoma differentiation-associated protein 5 antibody-positive dermatomyositis (MDA5 + DM) is a subtype of dermatomyositis characterized by the presence of anti-MDA5 antibodies, skin rashes with ulceration, tender palmar papules, minimal or absent muscle involvement, and rapidly progressive interstitial lung disease (RP-ILD) . ILD, a severe manifestation of MDA5 + DM, significantly influences patient prognosis . Additionally, macrophage activation syndrome, hemorrhagic myositis, and pneumomediastinum have been reported as potentially lethal complications of MDA5 + DM .The pathogenesis and pathophysiology of MDA5 + DM remain largely unknown. However, recent studies have shown the important role of cytokine abnormalities, particularly those of type I interferon (IFN) . Macrophage activation also plays a critical role in organ damage, and serum levels of ferritin, secreted by activated macrophages, are linked to disease activity and prognosis . Additionally, vasculopathy may contribute to organ damage, including skin ulcers and potentially ILD .Several studies have reported on various prognostic factors in MDA5+DM , with RP-ILD emerging as the most significant factor of poor prognosis . The prognostic factors include demographic variables such as old age and male sex ; hematological factors such as increased white blood cell (WBC), neutrophilia, lymphopenia, and increased neutrophil-to-lymphocyte (N/L) ratio ; laboratory parameters related to tissue damage such as elevated levels of aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alanine aminotransferase (ALT), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), and gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (γ-GTP) ; inflammatory markers such as increased levels of C- reactive protein (CRP) and ferritin [9, 10, 15–17]; ILD-related markers such as decreased pulmonary function, extensive pulmonary abnormalities, increased Krebs von den Lungen-6 (KL-6) and surfactant protein-D (SP-D) levels [9, 14, 16–19]; and increased cytokine levels of IL-6, IL-15, and IFN-λ . However, the relationships between these prognostic factors remain unclear, and it is yet to be determined whether they form several prognostic groups. Furthermore, the association between immunological and cytokine abnormalities and the prognostic factor groups is still uncertain.This study aims to identify pathways linking cytokine abnormalities to prognosis using prognostic factor groups, assessing their impact on mortality, and analyzing the relationship between cytokine levels and the prognostic factor groups. Furthermore, we sought to develop a prognostic model using selected factors from each pathway as variables.