1Introduction: Basophils, Their Functions and Application of the Basophil Activation Test (BAT) in AllergyBasophils are rare leukocytes that mature from haematopoietic stem cells in the bone marrow and are mobilised as fully differentiated cells into the peripheral blood, constituting < 1% of total white blood cells in humans. The precise ontology of basophils is not yet completely clear. In humans, a shared basophil/eosinophil progenitor has been described, while distinct basophil/mast cell progenitors have also been reported in animal models . In some ways, basophils resemble mast cells, which are found in tissue, primarily located near blood vessels and mucosal surfaces, whereas basophils are circulating leukocytes. Basophils have numerous cytoplasmic secretory granules filled with proinflammatory mediators and express a wide range of cell surface receptors that facilitate activation through multiple pathways. Among them, fully functional IgE receptors (FcεRI) can bind allergen‐specific IgE (sIgE) with high affinity and be cross‐linked by multivalent allergen interactions. This results in basophil activation and rapid degranulation, with the release of histamine, tryptase, and other proinflammatory mediators, including certain eicosanoids (e.g., leukotriene C4 (LTC4) that cause the characteristic allergic reactions). In addition to IgE‐mediated activation, basophils can be triggered by a wide range of stimuli . These include N‐formylmethionine‐leucyl‐phenylalanine (fMLP), complement anaphylatoxins (C5a or C3a) that activate these cells via a G‐protein coupled receptor, and immune complexes of antigens formed with IgG functioning through recognition of Fcγ receptors. Additionally, certain experimental non‐physiological conditions induce basophil degranulation in vitro, such as hypo‐ or hyper‐osmolar conditions, direct increase of cytosolic Ca2+ by A23187, or activation of protein kinase C (PKC) by phorbol ester (Figure 1) .FIGURE 1Flow diagram of the process of basophil stimulation and evaluation using BAT. (1) Stimulation: Key examples of IgE‐mediated and non‐IgE mediated stimuli used in BAT are highlighted. IgE‐mediated stimuli activate basophils by cross‐linking endogenous IgE (e.g., via polyclonal anti‐IgE antibody) or through direct cross‐linking of FcɛRI using an anti‐FcɛRI antibody. Non‐IgE mediated stimuli, such as fMLP or complement anaphylatoxins, activate basophils via alternative pathways. (2) Incubation: Stimuli are incubated with whole blood ex vivo for usually 20–30 min at 37°C, typically in a water bath or incubator. During activation, basophils upregulate activation markers such as CD63, which translocate from cytoplasmic vesicles to the cell surface. CD203c, another activatory and identification marker, also increases in surface expression upon activation. (3) Staining: Fluorochrome‐labelled antibodies are added to identify basophils and quantify the upregulation of surface activation markers. Comparing stimulated samples to unstimulated controls allows assessment of basophil activation. In some protocols, incubation and staining occur simultaneously. (4) Analysis: After incubation, supernatants can be collected to measure secreted mediators. Samples are then treated to lyse red blood cells, centrifuged, and washed, and cells are resuspended in appropriate media. Flow cytometry can be performed immediately or on fixed samples stored at 4°C. Analysis involves measuring percentage of cell expressing or the mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) of activation markers and comparing stimulated samples to unstimulated controls. For allergen testing, patient hypersensitivity is assessed relative to maximal activation by positive controls and baseline values. Created with BioRender.com.Basophils are dynamic cells in the circulation and can be mobilised by chemokine signals that can induce their degranulation, especially in combination with other stimuli such as platelet‐activating factor or interleukin (IL)‐3. Basophils are also an early source of IL‐4 and other type 2‐related cytokines. As such, basophils play an important role in allergic diseases, contributing to both the early induction of Th2 responses and to the allergic late phase. This involvement is marked by their selective migration to affected tissues, as observed in asthma, rhinitis and atopic dermatitis . After insect venom‐ or food‐induced anaphylaxis, basophils decrease in the circulation most likely due to activation and migration into tissues .The physiological role of basophils is mainly in the defence against parasites such as helminths, but studies in mouse models also suggest that they play essential roles in the defence against ticks ( Haemaphysalis longicornis ) . Besides this and their role in allergic diseases, basophils are involved in a variety of other pathologies including cancer, myocardial infarction, autoimmunity, fibrosis, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease . Activated basophils have been observed in the blood of patients with chronic urticaria and systemic lupus erythematosus. Additionally, IgE autoantibodies and activated basophils are factors associated with disease activity in lupus nephritis . Basophils in the circulation and within the tumour microenvironment (TME) may also contribute to anti‐tumour immunity and patient outcomes .The propensity of basophils to be stimulated by suspected allergens can be tested in BAT, a functional cell‐based assay performed in whole human blood ex vivo. BAT mimics the activation of basophils in human circulation when these cells encounter either IgE or non‐IgE mediated stimuli. BAT is increasingly becoming an established assay in a growing number of routine diagnostic laboratories in the field of allergy, to predict, diagnose, and monitor hypersensitivity reactions (HSR) to different allergens (i.e., food, hymenoptera venoms, and therapeutic drugs).In this position paper, we explore and advocate for the potential of the BAT as a valuable tool in the field of AllergoOncology. We review its emerging applications, adapted from allergy to oncology and AllergoOncology, for translational cancer research, studying HSR to cancer therapies, and to aid diagnosis, monitoring, and stratification. We discuss the challenges of implementing BAT in oncology and highlight the importance of and opportunities for collaboration between allergy and oncology experts. We propose key research directions and routes to achieve clinical application of this highly promising allergy tool as a validated and widely used assay for AllergoOncology research and patient benefit.