IntroductionSystemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a severe, chronic, systemic autoimmune/autoinflammatory disease characterized by intermittent and widespread inflammation . Juvenile-onset SLE (jSLE), defined by symptom onset before the age of 18 years, accounts for ∼15–20% of all SLE patients. When compared with adult-onset disease, jSLE presents generally with a more severe phenotype, higher disease activity and more organ damage, requiring more aggressive immunosuppressive treatments . Overall standardized mortality rates (SMR) are higher in SLE as compared with the general population (SMR 2.2 across all ages), and in patients under the age of 18 years, the SMR is three times higher than in adult-onset SLE (SMR 6.5) . Therefore, timely identification of disease activity and the prediction of flares are critically important to guide therapeutic interventions and to limit organ damage, improving long-term prognosis and ultimately reducing mortality.Despite the routine use of conventional biomarkers, including anti-double stranded DNA (dsDNA) antibodies, complement levels and erythrocyte sedimentation rates (ESR), to monitor disease activity of SLE patients, none of these have demonstrated sufficient reliability to base therapeutic decision making solely on laboratory parameters . Although the pathogenesis of SLE is complex and still incompletely elucidated , the role of type I interferon (IFN), especially IFN-α2, has been established .Direct quantification of IFN is challenging, due to low serum concentrations (even associated with disease flares) that are not detectable by the currently available immunoassays . To overcome this, indirect measurement of IFN pathway activation has been proposed by evaluating the messenger RNA (mRNA) expression of interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs) in peripheral blood cells, known as the IFN signature . Notably, the predominance of type I IFN activation is more pronounced in jSLE than in adult-onset SLE, as 95% of pediatric patients display a pathological type I IFN signature in peripheral blood mononuclear cells, as compared with 50–80% of adult-onset SLE patients . However, to date, the IFN signature has not yet become a common tool in routine laboratory settings, due to the relative complexity of the technique, lack of standardization and its limited availability . A novel ultra-sensitive digital immunoassay known as single-molecule array (Simoa), able to detect extremely low protein concentrations, has overcome those challenges, allowing direct quantification of this cytokine . Studies in adult-onset SLE cohorts demonstrated that the measurement of IFN-α2 with Simoa exhibits similar sensitivity when compared with IFN signatures [12–14]. Notably, in adult-onset SLE, an association between elevated serum IFN-α2 levels and disease activity was demonstrated, and IFN-α2 levels predict future flares in patients who experience clinical remission .Using this highly sensitive digital immunoassay, this study investigated the ability of serum IFN-α2 levels to discern jSLE patients from controls [juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA) patients and healthy participants], and jSLE patients with active disease from those in a low disease activity state (LDAS) and/or remission [15–18]. Furthermore, we interrogated whether IFN-α2 levels, alone or combined with conventional laboratory-based biomarkers, could detect ongoing disease flare, predict the risk of flare and estimate time to a subsequent flare.