MethodsA total of 222 serum samples were analysed, including 28 healthy controls (HCs), 88 jSLE (159 samples) and 35 juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA) patients. IFN-α2 levels were determined using single-molecule array (Simoa). Cross-sectionally, median IFN-α2 levels were compared between patient groups and disease activity state sub-groups. Time to flare was analysed by linear regression. Longitudinally, the ability of the IFN-α2 and other traditional biomarkers (erythrocyte sedimentation rate/ESR, low C3 and anti-dsDNA antibodies) to detect and predict flares was assessed via a generalised linear mixed model. Patients, materials and methodsStudy design and participantsThis study included jSLE and JIA patients, and healthy participants enrolled in the UK JSLE Cohort Study . Patients fulfilled a minimum of four ACR-1997 classification criteria for SLE and had a minimum of 1-year longitudinal follow-up data recorded (to enable assessment of subsequent flare occurrence at 6 and 12 months post serum IFN-α2 quantification). Although most jSLE patients were recruited at the time of diagnosis, enrolment in the UK JSLE Cohort Study was open to patients at any stage of their disease course. Serum samples were collected between November 2010 and November 2019, after the commencement of jSLE treatment. Data on clinical features, demographics, including ethnicity according to the UK National Census categorizations , treatments, standardized disease activity measures [British Isles Lupus Assessment Group (BILAG) 2004 disease activity index  and Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Disease Activity Index 2000 (SLEDAI-2k)] were collected alongside each serum sample. Laboratory data collected included anti-dsDNA antibody titres (cut-off value representing anti-dsDNA positivity: 20 IU/ml), complement component 3 levels (C3, cut-off for low: 0.90 g/dl), full blood count (FBC) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR, normal if below 10 mm/h, mildly to moderately raised if between 10 and 50 mm/h and highly raised if above 50 mm/h).JSLE patients were divided into four sub-categories including remission [fulfilling any of the four original adult-onset SLE Definition of Remission in SLE (DORIS) 2017 framework remission criteria ], LDAS [meeting any of the adult-onset SLE Lupus Clinical Trials Consortium (LCTC LDAS), Asia Pacific Lupus Collaboration Lupus Low Disease Activity State (LLDAS) and Toronto definitions of LDAS ]; having intermediate disease active state (SLEDAI-2k score between 5–9); or active disease (SLEDAI-2k score ≥10) (Supplementary Table S1, available at Rheumatology online). Disease flare at 6 and 12 months after IFN-α2 measurement was defined according to the BILAG-2004 flare index as a new A or B score in at least one BILAG-2004 domain .Patients with JIA had peripheral blood samples collected alongside basic demographic information and International League Against Rheumatism (ILAR) sub-type classification for JIA . Children <16 years without a past medical history of inflammatory or recent infectious disease were recruited as healthy controls (HC), and peripheral blood samples and demographic information were collected.Single-molecule array (Simoa)Serum IFN-α2 levels, expressed in femtogram per milliliter (fg/ml), were determined by Simoa technology using a commercial kit for IFN-α2 quantification (Quanterix™, Lexington, MA, USA) at the University of Edinburgh following manufacturer’s instructions. The lower limit of detection of this immunoassay was 5 fg/ml, and the upper limit of quantification 52 200 fg/ml. In this study, IFN-α2 values below the lower limit of detection were assigned a standard value equal to 3.53 fg/ml (lower limit of detection/√2) . All serum samples were analysed in duplicate, and mean, median, standard deviation (SD) and coefficient of variation (CV) were calculated. All samples with a CV >20 were excluded. Healthy control IFN-α2 level mean and SD were calculated after removing three extreme outliers with IFN-α2 mean values >1000 fg/ml.Statistical analysisCategorical variables were expressed as numbers (percentage, %), and quantitative variables as the mean±SD or median and interquartile range (IQR), as appropriate. P-values <0.05 were considered statistically significant.Statistical analyses and graphs were performed using R software packages (dplyr, stats, survival, foreign, glmnet, FSA, gee, lme4, coxme) version 4.2.0 and GraphPad Prism software version 9.5 (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA, USA).Cross-sectional analysesOnly one sample per participant was included in the cross-sectional analyses. Where multiple samples were available for a participant, the one with the lowest CV was included. Median IFN-α2 levels were compared between patient groups (HCs, JIA and jSLE patients) and jSLE patient sub-groups (active/intermediate, LDAS or remission). In addition, a sensitivity analysis was conducted to assess IFN-α2 levels across different disease activity states in jSLE patients, incorporating all patient visit data, using a Generalized Linear Mixed Model (GLMM).Cross-sectional data were utilized for comparing IFN-α2 levels between HCs, JIA and jSLE patients, due to the absence of longitudinal data for the first two groups. A cross-sectional approach was taken when investigating potential differences in IFN-α2 levels among jSLE patient sub-groups defined according to sex, ethnicity, disease activity states and prednisolone dosage, due to the limited availability of jSLE patients with more than one visit (Supplementary Table S2, available at Rheumatology online). Student’s t test and Mann–Whitney U test were used in pairwise comparisons of parametric and nonparametric continuous data, respectively, and Fisher’s exact or χ2 test for categorical data. One-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s post hoc test and Kruskal–Wallis followed by Dunn’s post hoc tests with Benjamini–Hochberg P-value correction method were used when comparing more than two groups in normally distributed and non-normally distributed data, respectively. Differences in time to disease flare within 6 and 12 months for jSLE patients in the cross-sectional analyses were assessed by comparing time to flare between those with normal and abnormal IFN-α2 levels using t tests and linear regression. Patients who did not experience a flare within these periods were excluded from the analyses.Longitudinal analysesAs data on serial serum IFN-α2 measurements were available for some jSLE patients (Supplementary Table S2, available at Rheumatology online), longitudinal analyses including all available samples were also performed. To investigate the ability of IFN-α2 levels and other traditional jSLE biomarkers (anti-dsDNA antibodies, low C3 levels, ESR) to detect an ongoing flare and to predict a flare at the following visit, univariable and multivariable GLM models were used. Time to flare was assessed using Cox models with cluster effects to account for repeated measures from the same participant. Patients who did not experience a flare during these timeframes were appropriately censored, with their survival time set to the maximum analysis duration of 168 (time to flare within 6 months) and 365 days (time to flare within 12 months). Both univariable analyses, including a covariate to represent each biomarker in turn, and multivariable analyses, including all biomarkers in a single model, were undertaken. Study design and participantsThis study included jSLE and JIA patients, and healthy participants enrolled in the UK JSLE Cohort Study . Patients fulfilled a minimum of four ACR-1997 classification criteria for SLE and had a minimum of 1-year longitudinal follow-up data recorded (to enable assessment of subsequent flare occurrence at 6 and 12 months post serum IFN-α2 quantification). Although most jSLE patients were recruited at the time of diagnosis, enrolment in the UK JSLE Cohort Study was open to patients at any stage of their disease course. Serum samples were collected between November 2010 and November 2019, after the commencement of jSLE treatment. Data on clinical features, demographics, including ethnicity according to the UK National Census categorizations , treatments, standardized disease activity measures [British Isles Lupus Assessment Group (BILAG) 2004 disease activity index  and Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Disease Activity Index 2000 (SLEDAI-2k)] were collected alongside each serum sample. Laboratory data collected included anti-dsDNA antibody titres (cut-off value representing anti-dsDNA positivity: 20 IU/ml), complement component 3 levels (C3, cut-off for low: 0.90 g/dl), full blood count (FBC) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR, normal if below 10 mm/h, mildly to moderately raised if between 10 and 50 mm/h and highly raised if above 50 mm/h).JSLE patients were divided into four sub-categories including remission [fulfilling any of the four original adult-onset SLE Definition of Remission in SLE (DORIS) 2017 framework remission criteria ], LDAS [meeting any of the adult-onset SLE Lupus Clinical Trials Consortium (LCTC LDAS), Asia Pacific Lupus Collaboration Lupus Low Disease Activity State (LLDAS) and Toronto definitions of LDAS ]; having intermediate disease active state (SLEDAI-2k score between 5–9); or active disease (SLEDAI-2k score ≥10) (Supplementary Table S1, available at Rheumatology online). Disease flare at 6 and 12 months after IFN-α2 measurement was defined according to the BILAG-2004 flare index as a new A or B score in at least one BILAG-2004 domain .Patients with JIA had peripheral blood samples collected alongside basic demographic information and International League Against Rheumatism (ILAR) sub-type classification for JIA . Children <16 years without a past medical history of inflammatory or recent infectious disease were recruited as healthy controls (HC), and peripheral blood samples and demographic information were collected. Statistical analysisCategorical variables were expressed as numbers (percentage, %), and quantitative variables as the mean±SD or median and interquartile range (IQR), as appropriate. P-values <0.05 were considered statistically significant.Statistical analyses and graphs were performed using R software packages (dplyr, stats, survival, foreign, glmnet, FSA, gee, lme4, coxme) version 4.2.0 and GraphPad Prism software version 9.5 (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA, USA).Cross-sectional analysesOnly one sample per participant was included in the cross-sectional analyses. Where multiple samples were available for a participant, the one with the lowest CV was included. Median IFN-α2 levels were compared between patient groups (HCs, JIA and jSLE patients) and jSLE patient sub-groups (active/intermediate, LDAS or remission). In addition, a sensitivity analysis was conducted to assess IFN-α2 levels across different disease activity states in jSLE patients, incorporating all patient visit data, using a Generalized Linear Mixed Model (GLMM).Cross-sectional data were utilized for comparing IFN-α2 levels between HCs, JIA and jSLE patients, due to the absence of longitudinal data for the first two groups. A cross-sectional approach was taken when investigating potential differences in IFN-α2 levels among jSLE patient sub-groups defined according to sex, ethnicity, disease activity states and prednisolone dosage, due to the limited availability of jSLE patients with more than one visit (Supplementary Table S2, available at Rheumatology online). Student’s t test and Mann–Whitney U test were used in pairwise comparisons of parametric and nonparametric continuous data, respectively, and Fisher’s exact or χ2 test for categorical data. One-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s post hoc test and Kruskal–Wallis followed by Dunn’s post hoc tests with Benjamini–Hochberg P-value correction method were used when comparing more than two groups in normally distributed and non-normally distributed data, respectively. Differences in time to disease flare within 6 and 12 months for jSLE patients in the cross-sectional analyses were assessed by comparing time to flare between those with normal and abnormal IFN-α2 levels using t tests and linear regression. Patients who did not experience a flare within these periods were excluded from the analyses.Longitudinal analysesAs data on serial serum IFN-α2 measurements were available for some jSLE patients (Supplementary Table S2, available at Rheumatology online), longitudinal analyses including all available samples were also performed. To investigate the ability of IFN-α2 levels and other traditional jSLE biomarkers (anti-dsDNA antibodies, low C3 levels, ESR) to detect an ongoing flare and to predict a flare at the following visit, univariable and multivariable GLM models were used. Time to flare was assessed using Cox models with cluster effects to account for repeated measures from the same participant. Patients who did not experience a flare during these timeframes were appropriately censored, with their survival time set to the maximum analysis duration of 168 (time to flare within 6 months) and 365 days (time to flare within 12 months). Both univariable analyses, including a covariate to represent each biomarker in turn, and multivariable analyses, including all biomarkers in a single model, were undertaken. Participant characteristicsA total of 291 serum samples from 196 participants were analysed, including 95 jSLE, 52 JIA patients and 49 HCs. After the exclusion of 69 samples with a CV >20 between duplicate analyses, 222 samples were included in the statistical analysis from 88 jSLE (159 samples), 35 JIA patients and 28 HCs (Table 1). A median of one sample per jSLE patient was available (IQR 1–2, range 1–6, Table 1). Supplementary Table S2, available at Rheumatology online, illustrates visit/sampling visitation patterns among the jSLE patients studied, showing that 64% had only one visit, while the remaining 36% had more than one visit. Samples from JIA patients and HCs were one per individual. Among all jSLE visits, 71 (45%) were in active or intermediate disease activity state, 65 (41%) in LDAS and 23 (14%) in remission.Table 1.Demographic information of study participantsAll jSLE (n = 88)JIAa (n = 35)HCs (n = 28) P-valuebGender, n (%)71 F (81), 17 M (19)24 F (69), 11 M (31)23 F (82), 5 M (18)NSAge at diagnosis, years (median [IQR])12.5 [9.5, 14.0]——NAAge at sample collection, years (median [IQR])15.7 [14.0, 18.4]12.9 [11.1, 14.8]16.0 [15.7, 16.6]<0.0001cEthnicity, n (%)<0.0001dWhite35 (44)34 (100)24 (86)Asian29 (36)—2 (7)African/Caribbean16 (20)—2 (7)NA8/881/35—Prednisolone dosage, mg (median [IQR])0.0 [0.0–5.0]NANANANumber of visits per patient [IQR; range]1 [1, 2; 1–6]11NAaJIA sub-types: 11 oligoarticular JIA, 16 polyarticular JIA, 3 juvenile psoriatic arthritis, 5 systemic-onset JIA.bComparison of proportions across participant groups (Kruskal–Wallis test).cDunn’s post hoc tests with Benjamini–Hochberg P-value correction method: HCs vs JIA P =0.0002; JIA vs jSLE P < 0.0001.dDunn’s post hoc tests with Benjamini–Hochberg P-value correction method: jSLE vs JIA P <0.0001; jSLE vs HCs P = 0.007.F, females; HCs, healthy controls; IQR, interquartile range; JIA, juvenile idiopathic arthritis; jSLE, juvenile systemic lupus erythematosus; LDAS, low disease activity state; M, males; NA, not available/applicable; NS, not significant. Supplementary material Supplementary material is available at Rheumatology online. Supplementary Materialkeae643_Supplementary_Data