ConclusionSerum IFN-α2 levels associate with disease activity and can predict ongoing and future flares in jSLE. These findings suggest that quantification of IFN-α2 may support risk stratification and disease monitoring in these patients. DiscussionThis is the largest study to date directly assessing IFN-α2 levels in jSLE, using the Simoa digital immunoassay. It is unique by including both an inflammatory control group (JIA patients) and HCs. The study demonstrated that serum IFN-α2 levels are elevated in jSLE patients as compared with JIA patients and HCs. Furthermore, serum IFN-α2 levels associate with disease activity states in jSLE patients and predict future flares.The observation that jSLE patients have higher IFN-α2 levels than JIA patients and HCs, and that those levels are linked to disease activity and flare occurrence, aligns with the established role of this cytokine in the pathogenesis of SLE [6]. This is further corroborated by the efficacy of inhibition of type I IFN signalling in jSLE patients, including Janus kinase (JAK) inhibitors [25], IFN antibodies (e.g. rontalizumab, sifalimumab) [26, 27] and type I IFN receptor blockers (e.g. anifrolumab) [28]. Increased type I IFN expression in SLE involves a complex interplay between genetic contributors and immune responses to tissue damage. Genetic variants affecting the clearance of cytoplasmic nucleic acids and apoptotic material or enhancing the activation of cytoplasmic acid sensors contribute to type I IFN production [6, 29]. In this context, increased genetic burden in the paediatric population may (at least partially) explain the more pronounced IFN expression observed in jSLE, potentially contributing to the more severe clinical phenotype in children when compared with adult patients [30]. Additionally, tissue damage secondary to several stimuli (e.g. infections, ultraviolet radiation, mechanical stress, etc), results in the accumulation of cellular debris and nuclear material in the extracellular compartment, activation of TLR3/7 pathways, and, ultimately, IFN production [31, 32].Notably, within this jSLE cohort, serum IFN-α2 levels were significantly higher in patients of African/Caribbean descent compared with White and Asian participants, regardless of disease activity state. The association between elevated serum IFN-α2 levels and African/Caribbean ethnicity has previously been reported [33]. This could be related to genetic contributing factors and/or the more severe phenotype observed in these patients, with more tissue damage and higher mortality [34]. In line with previous reports demonstrating limited ability of glucocorticoids to influence the type I IFN pathway [35, 36], we found no significant association between IFN-α2 levels and glucocorticoid treatment dosage.In adult-onset SLE, elevated serum IFN-α2 levels measured by Simoa associate with high disease activity and may represent an independent predictive biomarker of disease flare in patients clinically in remission [12, 14]. Notably, Simoa-assessed serum IFN-α2 levels outperformed anti-dsDNA antibodies in identifying active disease and predicting future flares in patients in remission [12, 14]. In both pediatric and adult-onset patients, recent studies showed that IFN-α2 levels quantified with Simoa and IFN signatures are equally able to characterize specific disease activity states [37, 38]. However, the majority of previous studies have predominantly investigated the ISG score as a means to assess IFN-pathway activation (rather than directly quantifying serum IFN-α2 levels), despite its use in clinical practice not being validated [13]. Studies investigating the correlation between ISG score or surrogate markers of type I IFN (e.g. CXCL10, galectin-9) and disease activity in SLE patients have yielded inconsistent results, with some showing a correlation with ISG score or IFN surrogates [44] and others finding no such association [39, 40]. This may be partly because IFN scores are based on genes that could be induced not only by different IFNs (IFN-α, IFN-β and IFN-γ subtypes) but also by additional cytokines, such as TNF-α, thus limiting its specificity [19, 41]. While the Simoa platform is initially moderately expensive, its high sensitivity, specificity and low per-sample cost make it cost-effective for large-scale studies [42]. In this context, direct quantification of serum IFN-α2 levels using Simoa may represent an additional valuable, cost-effective high-throughput tool to detect and predict disease flares and identify patients who may benefit from targeted therapies.International recommendations for both jSLE and adult-onset SLE [43, 44] support the implementation of a T2T approach for patient management. Indeed, observational studies demonstrate that remission or LDAS target attainment associate with reduced damage accrual and flare frequency, glucocorticoid sparing, improved quality of life and survival [45, 46]. However, because of the aforementioned difficulties in measuring disease activity, current T2T clinical targets may not fully capture ‘biological’ disease activity. Thus, incorporating more objective measures that reflect subclinical systemic inflammation, such as serial IFN-α2 monitoring, may also prove valuable to predict future flares. However, validation of these reported findings in larger, independent and prospective cohorts is necessary.While this study indicates potential for IFN-α2 as a measure of disease activity and predictor of flares, this study has limitations. Despite representing a relatively large cohort for jSLE, the sample size remains limited in comparison to previous studies in adult-onset SLE cohorts. Although multiple visits per patient (1–6 visits) were available, the majority of the jSLE cohort had only one recorded visit, reducing statistical power and impacting use of more complex models utilizing longitudinal data. In future studies it would be useful to measure IFN-α2 levels at diagnosis (pre-treatment) and to track these longitudinally. Furthermore, a relatively high variation of IFN-α2 results in some experimental duplicates (23% of samples) was observed using Simoa. This was more marked for values near the lower limit of detection (5 fg/ml), impacting especially on IFN-α2 values observed in patients with JIA and in HCs. Auto-antibodies directed against IFN-α2 have been shown to be present in up to a quarter of SLE patients [47] and could theoretically interfere with quantification of IFN-α2 via the Simoa assay [47], potentially limiting the reliability of this assay in some patients. Other potential limitations of the Simoa assay could include antibody specificity, cross-reactivity, standardization and limitations in the assays dynamic range with loss of quantitative accuracy for samples with very high IFN-α2 levels. Thus, additional work is required to further improve IFN-α2 quantification prior to its introduction into clinical practice. Furthermore, data on disease activity in JIA patients were not available. Therefore, we cannot exclude that the differences observed between jSLE and JIA may also be (partially) due to variable disease activity states between disease groups. Finally, we were not able to assess the potential use of serum IFN-α2 as a predictor of disease onset in children with suspected jSLE, as samples from individuals without overt jSLE were not available. Further studies on longitudinally followed cohorts of healthy individuals may help to define if increased IFN-α2 levels may be observed before disease onset, similarly to what has been described for autoantibodies in adult-onset SLE patients [48]. ConclusionsObservations from this study suggest that quantification of IFN-α2 may support monitoring of disease activity in jSLE and predicting future flares. Further research, including larger independent cohorts from prospective studies is warranted to confirm findings and, possibly, to evaluate if IFN-α2 is able to predict disease onset in individuals with suspected early disease. Additionally, establishing whether this cost-effective, high-throughput and sensitive digital immunoassay could support T2T strategies in jSLE is a crucial next step.